**Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise**

![IHE\_LOGO\_for\_tf-docs](.//media/image1.jpeg)

**IHE IT Infrastructure**

**Technical Framework Supplement**

**Mobile Health Document Sharing**

**(MHDS)**

**HL7<sup>®</sup> FHIR<sup>®</sup>**

**Revision 2.1 – Trial Implementation**

Date: May 29, 2020

Author: ITI Technical Committee

Email: iti@ihe.net

**Please verify you have the most recent version of this document.** See
[here](http://ihe.net/Technical_Frameworks/) for Trial Implementation
and Final Text versions and [here](http://ihe.net/Public_Comment/) for
Public Comment versions.

**Foreword**

This is a supplement to the IHE IT Infrastructure Technical Framework
V16.0. Each supplement undergoes a process of public comment and trial
implementation before being incorporated into the volumes of the
Technical Frameworks.

This supplement is published on May 29, 2020 for trial implementation
and may be available for testing at subsequent IHE Connectathons. The
supplement may be amended based on the results of testing. Following
successful testing it will be incorporated into the IT Infrastructure
Technical Framework. Comments are invited and may be submitted at
[http://www.ihe.net/ITI\_Public\_Comments](http://www.ihe.net/ITI_Public_Comments/).

This supplement describes changes to the existing technical framework
documents.

“Boxed” instructions like the sample below indicate to the Volume Editor
how to integrate the relevant section(s) into the relevant Technical
Framework volume.

Amend Section 50.X by the following:

Where the amendment adds text, make the added text
**<span class="underline">bold underline</span>**. Where the amendment
removes text, make the removed text **~~bold strikethrough~~**. When
entire new sections are added, introduce with editor’s instructions to
“add new text” or similar, which for readability are not bolded or
underlined.

General information about IHE can be found at
[http://ihe.net](http://ihe.net/).

Information about the IHE IT Infrastructure domain can be found at
[http://ihe.net/IHE\_Domains](http://ihe.net/IHE_Domains/).

Information about the organization of IHE Technical Frameworks and
Supplements and the process used to create them can be found at
[http://ihe.net/IHE\_Process](http://ihe.net/IHE_Process/) and
[http://ihe.net/Profiles](http://ihe.net/Profiles/).

The current version of the IHE IT Infrastructure Technical Framework can
be found at
[http://ihe.net/Technical\_Frameworks](http://ihe.net/Technical_Frameworks/).

CONTENTS

[Introduction to this Supplement 5](#introduction-to-this-supplement)

[Open Issues and Questions 6](#open-issues-and-questions)

[Closed Issues 6](#closed-issues)

[IHE Technical Frameworks General Introduction
8](#ihe-technical-frameworks-general-introduction)

[9 Copyright Licenses 8](#copyright-licenses)

[9.1 Copyright of Base Standards 8](#copyright-of-base-standards)

[9.1.1 DICOM (Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine)
8](#dicom-digital-imaging-and-communications-in-medicine)

[9.1.2 HL7 (Health Level Seven) 8](#hl7-health-level-seven)

[9.1.3 LOINC (Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes)
8](#loinc-logical-observation-identifiers-names-and-codes)

[9.1.4 SNOMED CT (Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine -- Clinical
Terms)
9](#snomed-ct-systematized-nomenclature-of-medicine----clinical-terms)

[10 Trademark 9](#trademark)

[IHE Technical Frameworks General Introduction Appendices
10](#ihe-technical-frameworks-general-introduction-appendices)

[Appendix A – Actor Summary Definitions
10](#appendix-a-actor-summary-definitions)

[Appendix B – Transaction Summary Definitions 10](#_Toc41641123)

[Appendix D – Glossary 10](#appendix-d-glossary)

[**Volume 1 – Profiles 11**](#_Toc345074647)

[50 Mobile Health Document Sharing (MHDS) Profile
11](#mobile-health-document-sharing-mhds-profile)

[50.1 MHDS Actors, Transactions, and Content Modules
12](#mhds-actors-transactions-and-content-modules)

[**50.1.1 Actor Descriptions and Actor Profile Requirements**
15](#actor-descriptions-and-actor-profile-requirements)

[50.1.1.1 Document Registry 16](#document-registry)

[50.1.1.1.1 When the grouped MHD Document Recipient – is triggered
16](#when-the-grouped-mhd-document-recipient-is-triggered)

[50.1.1.1.2 When the grouped MHD Document Responder – is triggered
18](#when-the-grouped-mhd-document-responder-is-triggered)

[50.1.1.1.3 When the grouped PMIR Patient Identity Consumer – is
triggered
20](#when-the-grouped-pmir-patient-identity-consumer-is-triggered)

[50.1.1.2 Storage of Binary 20](#storage-of-binary)

[50.2 MHDS Actor Options 21](#mhds-actor-options)

[50.2.1 Authorization Option 21](#authorization-option)

[50.2.2 Consent Manager Option 22](#consent-manager-option)

[50.2.3 SVCM Validation Option 25](#svcm-validation-option)

[50.2.4 UnContained Reference Option 25](#uncontained-reference-option)

[50.3 MHDS Required Actor Groupings 26](#mhds-required-actor-groupings)

[50.4 MHDS Overview 27](#mhds-overview)

[50.4.1 Concepts 27](#concepts)

[50.4.2 Use Cases 27](#use-cases)

[50.4.2.1 Use Case \#1: Publication of a new document with persistence
27](#use-case-1-publication-of-a-new-document-with-persistence)

[50.4.2.2 Use Case \#2: Update of patient identity after an authorized
Merge
28](#use-case-2-update-of-patient-identity-after-an-authorized-merge)

[50.4.2.3 Use Case \#3: Discovery and Retrieval of existing documents
28](#use-case-3-discovery-and-retrieval-of-existing-documents)

[50.4.2.4 Use Case \#4: Consent Management for disclosure under Use Case
\#3 28](#use-case-4-consent-management-for-disclosure-under-use-case-3)

[50.5 MHDS Security Considerations 28](#mhds-security-considerations)

[50.5.1 Policies and Risk Management 29](#policies-and-risk-management)

[50.5.2 Technical Security and Privacy controls
30](#technical-security-and-privacy-controls)

[50.5.3 Applying Security and Privacy to Document Sharing
31](#applying-security-and-privacy-to-document-sharing)

[50.5.3.1 Basic Security 32](#basic-security)

[50.5.3.2 Protecting different types of documents
32](#protecting-different-types-of-documents)

[50.5.3.3 Patient Privacy Consent to participate in Document Sharing
34](#patient-privacy-consent-to-participate-in-document-sharing)

[50.5.3.4 Security and Privacy in a Patient Safety Environment
35](#security-and-privacy-in-a-patient-safety-environment)

[50.5.4 IHE Security and Privacy Controls
35](#ihe-security-and-privacy-controls)

[50.6 MHDS Cross Profile Considerations
36](#mhds-cross-profile-considerations)

[50.6.1 Interaction Diagram for the MHDS environment.
36](#interaction-diagram-for-the-mhds-environment.)

[50.6.2 Typical Client System Designs
40](#typical-client-system-designs)

[50.6.2.1 System that publishes documents System Design
40](#system-that-publishes-documents-system-design)

[50.6.2.2 System that consumes documents System Design
41](#system-that-consumes-documents-system-design)

[50.6.2.3 System that consumes clinical data elements Systems Design
41](#system-that-consumes-clinical-data-elements-systems-design)

[50.6.2.4 Central Infrastructure as a single system
42](#central-infrastructure-as-a-single-system)

[50.7 MHDS Background 43](#mhds-background)

[**50.7.1 Overview** 44](#overview)

[**50.7.2** Principles of IHE for Health Document Sharing
45](#principles-of-ihe-for-health-document-sharing)

[50.7.2.1 General IHE principles 46](#general-ihe-principles)

[50.7.2.2 Document Sharing Governance 46](#document-sharing-governance)

[50.7.2.3 Distinction between Documents and Messages
47](#distinction-between-documents-and-messages)

[50.7.2.4 Longitudinal Patient Record 48](#longitudinal-patient-record)

[50.7.2.5 Use of Documents 49](#use-of-documents)

[50.7.2.6 Value of Metadata 50](#value-of-metadata)

[50.7.2.7 Document Relationships 51](#document-relationships)

[50.7.2.8 Document Sharing Models 51](#document-sharing-models)

[50.7.2.9 Patient Identity Management 52](#patient-identity-management)

[50.7.2.10 Locating sharing partners 52](#locating-sharing-partners)

[50.7.2.11 Security/Privacy 53](#securityprivacy)

[50.7.3 Document sharing profiles 53](#document-sharing-profiles)

[50.7.3.1 Direct Push 54](#direct-push)

[50.7.3.2 MHDS based Centralized Discovery and Retrieve
54](#mhds-based-centralized-discovery-and-retrieve)

[50.7.3.2.1 Document Publishing 55](#document-publishing)

[50.7.3.2.2 Document Discovery 56](#document-discovery)

[50.7.3.2.3 Governance 56](#governance)

[50.7.3.2.4 Notifications 57](#notifications)

[50.7.3.3 Federated Discovery and Retrieve
57](#federated-discovery-and-retrieve)

[50.7.4 Patient Identity Management 57](#patient-identity-management-1)

[50.7.4.1 Patient Identity Management
58](#patient-identity-management-2)

[50.7.4.2 Patient Demographics Query for Mobile (PDQm)
59](#patient-demographics-query-for-mobile-pdqm)

[50.7.5 Common Provider Directory 60](#common-provider-directory)

# Introduction to this Supplement

This profile will show how to build a Document Sharing Exchange using
IHE-profiled FHIR<sup>®</sup> standard, rather than the legacy IHE
profiles that are dominated by XDS and HL7<sup>®</sup> v2. This profile
will assemble profiles and define a Document Registry.

The central HIE infrastructure defined in this Profile might be a single
FHIR Server implementing all the defined central service actors or may
be virtual cloud of the systems implementing the defined profile actors.
These deployment models allow for modularity where each service function
could be provided by different vendors, leveraging as much as possible
from a reference implementation of a FHIR Server, and also leverage as
much as possible of modularity enabled by defined Profiles.

Core business functions provided by MHDS Profile:

  - Publication of Document based information

<!-- end list -->

  - Content agnostic but CDA<sup>®</sup> and FHIR preferred

<!-- end list -->

  - Persistence and lifecycle management of Documents, DocumentManifest,
    DocumentReference, and List resources

<!-- end list -->

  - Enabling centralized document storage, or distributed document
    storage at a service identified at the source

<!-- end list -->

  - Patient Identity Management –

<!-- end list -->

  - specifically, a golden patient identity for use within the domain,
    cross-reference to other identities, and lifecycle of updates

  - Appropriate comprehensive handling of patient identity updates
    including merge

<!-- end list -->

  - Participant Organizations management

<!-- end list -->

  - Enabling use of mCSD directory for author identity management

<!-- end list -->

  - Authorization management

<!-- end list -->

  - Consent

  - User Role-Based-Access-Control (RBAC) or
    Attribute-Based-Access-Control (ABAC)

  - Application

  - PurposeOfUse

<!-- end list -->

  - Encryption and Integrity requirements

  - Audit Log Management

  - Consumption side can be further refined using mXDE and QEDm

## Open Issues and Questions

1.  Given that this profile audience is likely to include those new to
    IHE Document Sharing exchange, there is more detail included in this
    supplement in order to be more self-contained and not rely on the
    reader referencing other whitepapers and handbooks. Section 50.7
    could be considered to be removed if and when the ITI whitepaper on
    using IHE Profiles for and HIE is updated to include MHD and MHDS.

## Closed Issues

1.  This profile was renamed from MHD-HIE to Mobile Health Document
    Sharing (MHDS). This name leverages the concept of “Document
    Sharing” as defined in the HIE whitepaper and includes the
    original MHD acronym while removing the word “access” which is
    important in MHD to define it as an API and inserting the word
    “Sharing” which indicates persistence.

<!-- end list -->

2.  There is no action defined for the Document Registry when the PMIR
    feed transaction indicated a Delete action on a Patient that the
    Document Registry has records for. The concern is that this action
    is not clear outside of a policy. It is reasonable that policy may
    choose to ignore Delete, may choose to mark the affected Resources
    inactive, or may choose to delete the affected Resources. Thus, we
    have left this action undefined. It is expected that a Delete action
    is unusual, and that administrative user interface may be the better
    solution.

3.  Where XDS/XCA is used the MHDS Profile does not apply, as the MHD
    Profile provides the API functionality to XDS/XCA

4.  MHDS defines an OAuth scope for use with MHDS and IUA to support
    Patient Privacy Disclosure Consent functionality. This scope is
    crafted to be minimally impacting on uses of IUA and SMART-on-FHIR.
    See the “Consent Management Option” for details.

5.  In this profile, there is no formal Document Repository, although
    the functionality is provided virtually when a Document Source
    chooses to not include the document as a Binary resource, but rather
    include a URL to a repository that is recognized as part of the
    trust domain. This distinction is available in MHD today, although
    it is not pointed out as such and thus not well known. There is
    description of this virtual Document Repository functionality.

<!-- end list -->

1.  The MHDS environment allows for some normally contained Resources be
    recorded as a link to data in the mCSD managed Directory or PMIR
    Patient Identity Manager. This is defined in the “UnContained
    Reference Option”. The necessary change to MHD has not been done yet
    in order to get feedback from Public Comment. CP-ITI-1200 has
    updated. MHD to add an UnContained Reference Option for this support

# IHE Technical Frameworks General Introduction

The [IHE Technical Framework General
Introduction](http://ihe.net/Technical_Frameworks/#GenIntro) is shared
by all of the IHE domain technical frameworks. Each technical framework
volume contains links to this document where appropriate.

# Copyright Licenses

IHE International hereby grants to each Member Organization, and to any
other user of these documents, an irrevocable, worldwide, perpetual,
royalty-free, nontransferable, nonexclusive, non-sublicensable license
under its copyrights in any IHE profiles and Technical Framework
documents, as well as any additional copyrighted materials that will be
owned by IHE International and will be made available for use by Member
Organizations, to reproduce and distribute (in any and all print,
electronic or other means of reproduction, storage or transmission) such
IHE Technical Documents.

The licenses covered by this Copyright License are only to those
copyrights owned or controlled by IHE International itself. If parts of
the Technical Framework are included in products that also include
materials owned or controlled by other parties, licenses to use those
products are beyond the scope of this IHE document and would have to be
obtained from that other party.

## Copyright of Base Standards

IHE technical documents refer to and make use of a number of standards
developed and published by several standards development organizations.
All rights for their respective base standards are reserved by these
organizations. This agreement does not supersede any copyright
provisions applicable to such base standards. Copyright license
information for frequently referenced base standards is provided below.

### DICOM (Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine)

DICOM<sup>®</sup> is the registered trademark of the National Electrical
Manufacturers Association for its standards publications relating to
digital communications of medical information.

### HL7 (Health Level Seven)

HL7<sup>®</sup>, Health Level Seven<sup>®</sup>, CCD<sup>®</sup>,
CDA<sup>®</sup>, FHIR<sup>®</sup>, and the FHIR \[FLAME DESIGN\]
<sup>®</sup> are registered trademarks of Health Level. Seven
International and the use does not constitute endorsement by HL7.

Health Level Seven, Inc. has granted permission to IHE to reproduce
tables from the HL7 standard. The HL7 tables in this document are
copyrighted by Health Level Seven, Inc. All rights reserved. Material
drawn from these documents is credited where used.

### LOINC (Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes)

LOINC<sup>®</sup> is registered United States trademarks of Regenstrief
Institute, Inc.

### SNOMED CT (Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine -- Clinical Terms)

Some IHE Profiles incorporate SNOMED<sup>®</sup> CT, which is used by
permission of the International Health Terminology Standards Development
Organisation. SNOMED CT<sup>©</sup> was originally created by the
College of American Pathologists. SNOMED CT is a registered trademark of
the International Health Terminology Standards Development Organisation,
all rights reserved.

# Trademark

IHE<sup>®</sup> and the IHE logo are trademarks of the Healthcare
Information Management Systems Society in the United States and
trademarks of IHE Europe in the European Community. They may only be
used with the written consent of the IHE International Board Operations
Committee, which may be given to a Member Organization in broad terms
for any use that is consistent with the IHE mission and operating
principles.

# IHE Technical Frameworks General Introduction Appendices

The [IHE Technical Framework General Introduction
Appendices](http://ihe.net/Technical_Frameworks/#GenIntro) are
components shared by all of the IHE domain technical frameworks. Each
technical framework volume contains links to these documents where
appropriate.

Update the following appendices to the General Introduction as indicated
below. Note that these are **not** appendices to this domain’s Technical
Framework (TF-1, TF-2, TF-3 or TF-4) but rather, they are appendices to
the IHE Technical Frameworks General Introduction located
[here](https://www.ihe.net/resources/technical_frameworks/#GenIntro).

# Appendix A – Actor Summary Definitions

Add the following **new or modified** actors to the IHE Technical
Frameworks General Introduction Appendix A:

No *new* actors.

The table below lists *existing* actors that are utilized in this
profile.

List of Existing Actors Utilized in this Profile

| Existing Actor Name | Definition                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| ------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Document Registry   | The Document Registry maintains metadata about each registered document in a document entry. This includes a link to the Document in the Repository where it is stored. The Document Registry responds to queries from Document Consumer Actors about documents meeting specific criteria. It also enforces some healthcare specific technical policies at the time of document registration. |

# Appendix B – Transaction Summary Definitions

Add the following **new or modified** transactions to the IHE Technical
Frameworks General Introduction Appendix B:

No new transactions

# Appendix D – Glossary

Add the following **new or updated glossary** terms to the IHE Technical
Frameworks General Introduction Appendix D.

No new terms.

<span id="_Toc345074647" class="anchor"></span>Volume 1 – Profiles

Add new Section 50

# 50 Mobile Health Document Sharing (MHDS) Profile

The MHDS Profile specifies how a collection of IHE profiles can be used
by communities for exchanging health information. These IHE profiles
include support for patient identification, health document location and
retrieval, provider directories, and the protection of privacy and
security. MHDS shows how several IHE profiles work together to provide a
standards-based, interoperable approach to community health information
sharing.

The IHE IT Infrastructure Domain has published several resources to
support document sharing:

  - ITI Technical Framework: [Vol. 3 - Section 4.0 Metadata used in
    Document
    Sharing](http://www.ihe.net/uploadedFiles/Documents/ITI/IHE_ITI_TF_Vol3.pdf#nameddest=4_0_Metadata_used_in_Document_S)

  - [Health Information Exchange: Enabling Document Sharing Using IHE
    Profiles](https://www.ihe.net/wp-content/uploads/Technical_Framework/upload/IHE_ITI_White-Paper_Enabling-doc-sharing-through-IHE-Profiles_Rev1-0_2012-01-24.pdf)

  - [Document Sharing Metadata
    Handbook](https://www.ihe.net/uploadedFiles/Documents/ITI/IHE_ITI_Handbook_Metadata_Rev1-1_Pub_2018-08-20.pdf)

  - [Template for XDS Affinity Domain Deployment
    Planning](https://www.ihe.net/Technical_Framework/upload/IHE_ITI_White_Paper_XDS_Affinity_Domain_Template_TI_2008-12-02.pdf)

This MHDS Profile defines a Document Sharing Exchange that is based
around the HL7 FHIR standard, following the principles described in the
[Health Information Exchange: Enabling Document Sharing Using IHE
Profiles](https://www.ihe.net/wp-content/uploads/Technical_Framework/upload/IHE_ITI_White-Paper_Enabling-doc-sharing-through-IHE-Profiles_Rev1-0_2012-01-24.pdf)
whitepaper. This Document Sharing exchange requires the same management
of metadata as described in the [Document Sharing Metadata
Handbook](https://www.ihe.net/uploadedFiles/Documents/ITI/IHE_ITI_Handbook_Metadata_Rev1-1_Pub_2018-08-20.pdf).

![](.//media/image2.png)

Figure 50-1: MHDS High Level View Diagram

Readers that need background on high level concepts of Document Sharing
should first review Section 50.7 “MHD Background”. The MHDS Profile is
described in the following sections:

  - 50.1 – MHDS Actors, Transactions, and Content Modules

  - 50.2 – MHDS Actor Options

  - 50.3 – MHDS Required Actor Groupings

  - 50.4 – MHDS Overview and Use-cases

  - 50.5 – MHDS Security Considerations

  - 50.6 – MHDS Cross Profile Considerations

  - 50.7 – MHDS Background

## 50.1 MHDS Actors, Transactions, and Content Modules

This profile orchestrates actors in many existing IHE profiles and
creates one new actor. The actor that is specific to this profile is a
Document Registry. Figure 50.1-1 shows a detailed actor diagram for the
MHDS Document Registry.

![](.//media/image3.png)

Figure 50.1-1: MHDS Registry Actor Diagram

Table 50.1-1 lists the transactions for each actor directly involved in
the MHDS Profile. To claim compliance with this profile, an actor shall
support all required transactions (labeled “R”) and may support the
optional transactions (labeled “O”).

Table 50.1-1: MHDS Profile - Actors and Transactions

|                   |                                                                           |                        |             |           |
| ----------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------- | ----------- | --------- |
| Actors            | Transactions                                                              | Initiator or Responder | Optionality | Reference |
| Document Registry | (none) – transactions supported come from the grouped actors listed below | \--                    | \--         | \--       |

The Document Registry is grouped with a set of actors from other
profiles:

  - **MHD - Document Recipient** supports publication requests by the
    MHD Document Source. The Comprehensive Metadata Option is required.

  - **MHD - Document Responder** supports the discovery and retrieval of
    documents by MHD Document Consumer.

  - **PMIR - Patient Identity Consumer** provides patient identity
    synchronization and specifically the merge function to be applied to
    any data managed in the Document Registry.

  - **SVCM – Terminology Consumer** enables the Document Registry to
    gain access to ValueSets that the Registry is enforcing Metadata
    consistency.

  - **mCSD – Care Services Selective Consumer** enables the Registry to
    have access to Organization and Practitioner resources.

  - **IUA – Authorization Server and Resource Server** enforces access
    control decisions.

  - **ATNA - Secure Node** enable the Document Registry to be secure,
    record audit records, and support secure transactions.

  - **CT - Time Client** assures that all records of time done by the
    Document Registry are aligned with the Time Source.

**<span class="underline">HIE Central Infrastructure
Requirements</span>**

In MHDS, the Document Registry is part of a Document Sharing Health
Information Exchange (HIE). See Figure 50.1-2. The Document Registry
relies upon services that would be hosted within the HIE Central
Infrastructure with a set of Service endpoints as illustrated in the
yellow “HIE Central Infrastructure”. The HIE also contains systems,
illustrated in green, that submit and consume documents. The combination
of MHDS Document Registry (white), HIE Central Infrastructure (yellow),
and Systems that publish or consume documents (green) make up the
Document Sharing Community (aka Community).

![](.//media/image4.png)

Figure 50.1-2: MHDS Document Sharing Health Information Exchange

The HIE Central Infrastructure is a set of Services based on IHE
Profiles as shown in Figure 50.1-2:

  - **CT - Time Server** – to provide consistent time to all participant
    systems

  - **ATNA – Audit Record Repository** with support for the ATX: FHIR
    Feed Option – to capture audit events and provide appropriate audit
    log access for security and privacy use-cases

  - **PMIR – Patient Identity Source and Patient Identity Manager – to
    provide patient identity lookup by demographics or identity, and to
    receive create and update of patient identity from participants**

  - **SVCM – Terminology Repository** – Provide vocabulary and value set
    management within the Community

  - **mCSD – Care Services Selective Supplier** – a Provider Directory
    to enable endpoint lookup and optionally provider identity
    management

There are other useful actors that are compatible with MHDS, but are not
required by the MHDS Profile:

  - **NPFS – File Manager** – Provide files that are needed in the
    community but are not patient specific such as policy documents

  - **mXDE – Data Element Extractor** – to enable QEDm access to data
    elements derived from published documents

  - **QEDm – Clinical Data Source – to enable access to data elements
    (aka FHIR clinical Resources)**

  - **mACM – Alert Communication Manager** – to enable community
    supported alert communications

In addition to these IHE-defined actors, the Community will also select
how they will manage Digital Certificates through a Certificate
Authority, and other functionalities and non-functional requirements
such as response-time, service-level-agreements, remediation-planning,
remediation-access, etc.

The Document Registry and the supporting services listed above provide a
set of services that make up a Document Sharing Infrastructure that is
based on FHIR. This set of services enable systems that publish
documents and systems that consume documents. Additionally, the mXDE
Profile may be used to make the information in shared documents more
consumable as FHIR Resources using QEDm Profile. See Section 50.6 Cross
Profile Considerations for more details.

### **50.1.1 Actor Descriptions and Actor Profile Requirements**

This profile assumes that some Health Information Exchange (HIE)
authority manages the configuration of the Community. This includes
specification of an appropriate Certificate Authority, Time Source,
Domain Name Service, Valueset Management, Provider Directory, Audit
Record Repository, Patient Identity Manager, and Authorization Service.

The HIE authority is responsible for setting Patient Identity quality
criteria including the minimally acceptable Patient identity
constraints. This would set the data elements that describe the Patient
within the Community and the quality of the identity proofing and
identity confirmation necessary by all participants in the Community.

The HIE authority is responsible for setting Document Sharing Metadata
rules, following the metadata rules and using the Metadata Handbook to
set specific metadata element requirements including the specification
of mandatory ValueSets. See the [Document Sharing Metadata
Handbook](https://www.ihe.net/uploadedFiles/Documents/ITI/IHE_ITI_Handbook_Metadata_Rev1-1_Pub_2018-08-20.pdf).

#### 50.1.1.1 Document Registry

The functions of the MHDS Document Registry rely on grouped actors from
the other IHE Profiles; see Section 50.3.

The Document Registry SHALL include a configuration management function
to enable configuration of the grouped actors, including Metadata rules,
policy, and security.

The Document Registry SHALL be grouped with CT – Time Client to keep
internal clocks synchronized to the identified Time Source so that
records of time are correlated.

The Document Registry SHALL be grouped with an ATNA Secure Node or
Secure Application:

  - The Document Registry SHALL obtain a Digital Certificate from the
    HIE-defined Certificate Authority.

  - The Document Registry SHALL support at least the ATNA “STX: TLS 1.2
    Floor using BCP195” Option.

  - The Document Registry SHALL allow only authorized access to the
    protected resources managed by the Document Registry.

  - The Document Registry SHALL record all security relevant events to
    ATNA Audit Record Repository with the “ATX: FHIR Feed” Option. This
    SHALL include all IHE-defined audit events that are in the control
    of the Document Registry, including its grouped actors.

##### 50.1.1.1.1 When the grouped MHD Document Recipient – is triggered

Triggered by: a Provide Document Bundle \[ITI-65\] transaction.

![](.//media/image5.png)

Figure 50.1.1.1.1-1: Document Publication Process Flow

1.  The Document Registry SHALL confirm its identity to the requesting
    system by use of the ATNA Secure Node or Secure Application TLS
    protocol using a Certificate assigned to the Document Registry.

<!-- end list -->

6.  When the Authorization Option (Section 50.2.1) is implemented and
    enabled, the Document Registry SHALL confirm the client identity
    using the IUA Profile.

7.  The Document Registry SHALL validate to the requirements of MHD
    Document Recipient using the MHD Comprehensive Metadata Option.
    Additional policy driven requirements, not specified here, may also
    apply.

8.  When the UnContained Reference Option is used in the grouped MHD
    Document Recipient, the Document Registry SHALL not require that the
    references are contained, but SHALL validate that the reference is
    found in the central registries. (See Section 50.2.4 UnContained
    Reference Option.)

9.  The Document Registry SHALL validate that the subject of the
    DocumentReference, DocumentManifest, and List Resources is the same
    Patient, and that Patient is a recognized and active Patient within
    the Community. The Patient identity must be recognized and active by
    the PMIR Patient Identity Manager in the document sharing community.
    This may be accomplished by a query of the PMIR Patient Identity
    Manager, by way of a cached internal patient database, or other
    means.

10. The Document Registry SHALL validate the metadata conformance
    received according to the appropriate validation rules, and
    configured ValueSets to assure that the document submission request
    is valid. If any of the metadata are found to be not valid then the
    transaction shall be rejected.

11. When the SVCM Validation Option (Section 50.2.3) is implemented and
    enabled, the Document Registry SHALL use the grouped SVCM
    Terminology Consumer to validate metadata elements as appropriate to
    configured policy. For example, the DocumentReference.type often
    must be a value within a ValueSet agreed to by the Community.

12. Provided the request is valid, the Document Registry SHALL persist
    all DocumentManifest, DocumentReference, List, and Binary that are
    received by way of the grouped MHD - Document Recipient – Provide
    Document Bundle \[ITI-65\] Transaction.

13. When the request includes a DocumentReference intended to replace an
    existing DocumentReference, the Document Registry SHALL mark the
    replaced DocumentReference as deprecated. The Replace action in the
    request is indicated when the Bundle contains a new
    DocumentReference with DocumentReference.relatesTo.code of replaces
    and DocumentReference.relatesTo.target pointing at the existing
    DocumentReference to be deprecated. The Document Registry sets the
    existing DocumentReference.status element to inactive.

14. Any of the above checks that fail will result in the whole Provide
    Document Bundle \[ITI-65\] failing and returning errors as defined
    in \[ITI-65\].

15. The Document Registry SHALL record success and failure events into
    the ATNA Audit Record Repository.

##### 50.1.1.1.2 When the grouped MHD Document Responder – is triggered

Triggered by: any Find Document Manifests \[ITI-66\], Find Document
References \[ITI-67\], and Retrieve Document \[ITI-68\] Transactions.

![](.//media/image6.png)

Figure 50.1.1.1.2-1: Discovery and Retrieval of Existing Document
Process Flow

1.  The Document Registry SHALL confirm its identity to the requesting
    system by use of the ATNA Secure Node or Secure Application TLS
    protocol using a Certificate assigned to the Document Registry.

<!-- end list -->

16. When the Authorization Option is implemented and enabled, the
    Document Registry SHALL confirm the client identity using the IUA
    Profile.

17. Additional policy driven requirements, not specified here, may also
    apply. Such as enforcement at the Document Registry of
    Patient-specific Consent Directives.

18. The Document Registry SHALL validate that the subject of the find or
    retrieve request is a Patient that is a recognized Patient within
    the Community. The Patient identity must be recognized by the
    approved PMIR Patient Identity Manager system. This may be
    accomplished by a query of the PMIR manager, by way of a cached
    internal patient database, or other means.

19. The Document Registry SHALL provide the persisted resources to the
    grouped MHD Document Responder in support of the Document Responder
    duties to return results.

20. The Document Registry, if the Authorization Option is used, SHALL
    confirm that only authorized results are returned.

21. The Document Registry SHALL record a success or failure event into
    the ATNA Audit Record Repository.

##### 50.1.1.1.3 When the grouped PMIR Patient Identity Consumer – is triggered

Triggered by: a Mobile Patient Identity Feed \[ITI-93\] transaction with
a Merge:

![](.//media/image7.png)

Figure 50.1.1.1.3-1: Patient Merge Process Flow

The Document Registry SHALL search for any resources with the deprecated
\_id value in the DocumentManifest.subject, DocumentReference.subject,
and List.subject; and replace subject value of with the surviving id.
The Document Registry SHALL record a single audit event indicating the
Merge action, with an .entity element for each of the updated Document
Registry Resources updated. The Document Registry SHOULD create within
the Document Registry a single Provenance Resource indicating the Merge
action, with the .target element pointing at all of the resources
updated by the Document Registry.

No behavior is expected of the Document Registry on receipt of a feed
containing create, delete, or update, although the Document Registry may
consume and persist these to support the Document Registry requirements
to validate Patient references as a recognized Patient within the
Community.

#### 50.1.1.2 Storage of Binary

There are two alternatives for storing the Binary Resource for documents
stored in the community: (1) The Document Source includes the Binary
Resource in the \[ITI-65\] transaction, and the Document Registry is
required to store it. (2) The Community allows the Binary to be stored
elsewhere in the Community.

The second alternative requires that the Community has the alternative
to store the Binary in a system in the Community other than the Document
Registry. This might be other centralized infrastructure, distributed
infrastructure, or within the system implementing the Document Source.
The \[ITI-65\] transaction does not include the Binary, and the
DocumentReference.content.attachment.url. value is a persistent URL to
the Binary content. When this is used by the Community, the service
hosting the Binary shall:

  - persist the Binary for the lifecycle expected of the Community,

  - provide access to the community members,

  - use the security model agreed to by the community members

## 50.2 MHDS Actor Options

Options that may be selected for each actor in this profile, if any, are
listed in the Table 50.2-1. Dependencies between options, when
applicable, are specified in notes.

Table 50.2-1: MHDS – Actors and Options

| Actor             | Option Name                     | Reference      |
| ----------------- | ------------------------------- | -------------- |
| Document Registry | Authorization Option            | Section 50.2.1 |
|                   | Consent Manager Option (Note 1) | Section 50.2.2 |
|                   | SVCM Validation Option          | Section 50.2.3 |
|                   | Uncontained Reference Option    | Section 50.2.4 |

Note 1: The Consent Manager Option requires the Authorization Option

### 50.2.1 Authorization Option

The Document Registry SHALL be grouped with an IUA Resource Server and
IUA Authorization Server Actors. The IUA Resource Server enforces OAuth
Authorization decisions made by the grouped IUA Authorization Server.
Thus, all accesses to the Document Registry must have a token issued by
the IUA Authorization Server. These IUA Authorization Server decisions
protect both requests from MHD Document Source Actors for publication,
and from MHD Document Consumer actors for access and disclosure. The
rules used for this authorization decision are not defined in the MHDS
Profile. See the Consent Manager Option for specific access control
rules associated with that option.

![](.//media/image8.png)

Figure 50.2.1-1: Document Publication Process Flow with Authorization
Option

### 50.2.2 Consent Manager Option

The Document Registry SHALL be grouped with an IUA Resource Server and
the IUA Authorization Server in order to enforce simple Permit and Deny
access patient specific privacy disclosure consents for Treatment
purpose. The Consent Manager Option does not affect publication by
Document Source to the Document Registry, but rather only affects
disclosure activities between a Document Consumer and the Document
Registry.

The grouped IUA Authorization Server would be used to manage the consent
status and make authorization decisions based on the consent status. The
changing of the status is a functional requirement that is not defined
by IHE. The IUA Resource Server that is grouped with the MHDS Document
Registry would enforce these decisions.

![](.//media/image9.png)

Figure 50.2.2-1: Consent Management for Disclosure Process Flow

The grouped IUA Authorization Server SHALL support consent configuration
to enable Implied Consent and Explicit Consent environments. Implied
Consent environments allow disclosure when no Consent has been recorded
for that patient, Explicit Consent environments Deny disclosure when no
Consent has been recorded for that patient.

The Permit policy is specific to requests from an authorized Document
Consumer from authorized identities (applications and/or users) with
appropriate roles, and authorized Treatment PurposeOfUse.

![](.//media/image10.png)

Figure 50.2.2-2: Simple Consent state diagram

The IUA Authorization Server SHALL

  - support Permit and Deny policies and may support other policies.

  - support through some functionality the patient consent state to be
    changed: Authorize action to move from Deny to Permit state, and
    Revoke action to move from Permit to Deny state.

  - support consent state for PurposeOfUse of Treatment (HL7
    PurposeOfUse code of “TREAT”) and may support consent states for
    other PurposeOfUse values within the scope of the MHDS community.

  - Deny access to any PurposeOfUse not authorized.

  - support expiring a consent that results in a Permit state
    automatically transitioning to Deny at expiration.

The IUA Resource Server enforcement point grouped with the MHDS Document
Registry SHALL enforce the security authorization decision. This
includes confirming all data requested are for the specific patient.
This prevents a Document Consumer from requesting access to resources
outside the scope of the security token given it by the IUA
Authorization Server.

Note that this option does not protect Binary content stored outside of
the Document Registry; see Section 50.1.1.2. When documents are stored
outside of the Document Registry, the Document Source system takes on
the burden of protecting the document.

In order to support this Consent Manager Option, the following IUA
constraint is defined. This constraint impacts the Document Consumer
grouped IUA Authorization Client, and the IUA actors within the Document
Registry. The important elements for the Document Consumer to convey are
the scope values for PurposeOfUse and the identity of the Patient. This
OAuth Scope specification does not require the use of SMART-on-FHIR but
is compatible with it. There are two defined scope values that are
included in the scope separated by a space and repeated as necessary:

“PurposeOfUse” '.' PurposeOfUse

queryParam (e.g. “patient” '=' Patient)

e.g., a simple request for Treatment access to patient f5c7395

PurposeOfUse.TREAT
patient="http://myserver.example/fhir/Patient/f5c7395"

e.g., a request for Treatment, Payment, and Operations access to patient
f5c7395 in addition to SMART-on-FHIR scopes for read access to
DocumentReference, DocumentManifest, List, and Binary

> user/DocumentReference.read user/DocumentManifest.read user/List.read
> user/Binary.read PurposeOfUse.TREAT PurposeOfUse.HPAYMT
> PurposeOfUse.OPERAT
> patient="http://myserver.example/fhir/Patient/f5c7395"

### 50.2.3 SVCM Validation Option

The Document Registry that supports the SVCM Option SHALL be grouped
with a SVCM Terminology Consumer and uses this interface to do
validation of submitted metadata codes in the \[ITI-65\] submission as
being within in the community assigned valueSet. If any of the codes are
found to be not valid then Document Registry SHALL reject the \[ITI-65\]
transaction.

### 50.2.4 UnContained Reference Option

By default in \[ITI-65\], an MHD Document Source is required to include
by containment the information in the DocumentReference.author, the
DocumentReference.authenticator, the
DocumentReference.context.sourcePatientInfo, and the
DocumentManifest.author. This requirement encourages the persisting of
the information at the time the document is published. This supports
lifecycle management that recognizes that these identities change over
time, and often become invalid due to individual retirement or other
reasons to no-longer be active (e.g., the document is utilized 20 years
after it was first published, and thus the original author has long
since retired and would therefore not be in an active provider
directory.)

The UnContained Reference Option recognizes that a Community may choose
to longitudinally maintain their mCSD provider directory and PMIR
patient directory. When this longitudinal consistency is managed, then
the entries in the MHDS Document Registry do not need to make a copy of
the information known at the time of publication since a Reference to
the information in these directories will be valid over the full
lifecycle of the Document Registry entries.

The UnContained Reference Option requires the grouped MHD Document
Recipient to support the MHD UnContained Option. An MHD Document Source
may implement the MHD UnContained Option so as to be able to send
UnContained References. The MHD and MHDS UnContained Option allows
DocumentReference.author, DocumentReference.authenticator,
DocumentReference.context.sourcePatientInfo, and DocumentManifest.author
to be a Reference to a
(Practitioner|PractitionerRole|Organization|Patient) Resource, where the
referenced resource is published in the associated centrally managed
mCSD Care Services Selective Supplier, or PMIR Patient Identity Manager.

![](.//media/image11.png)

Figure 50.2.4-1: Author Reference Process Flow

The mCSD Care Services Selective Supplier and the PMIR Patient Identity
Manager are persisting long term the data so that the Resources within
the Document Registry are available for the life of the Document
Registry entry.

The Document Registry shall validate publication requests to ensure that
all DocumentReference.author, DocumentReference.authenticator,
DocumentReference.context.sourcePatientInfo, and
DocumentManifest.author; elements are either contained or are references
to valid and active entry in the mCSD Care Services Selective Supplier
or PMIR Patient Identity Manager. The Document Registry shall validate
this by use of mCSD Care Services Selective Consumer using the Find
Matching Care Services \[ITI-90\] transaction, and Patient identity
either internal Patient identity cache or possibly by PMIR Patient
Identity Manager using the PDQm Query \[ITI-78\].

## 50.3 MHDS Required Actor Groupings 

An actor from this profile (Column 1) shall implement all of the
required transactions in this profile ***in addition to***
***<span class="underline">all</span>*** of the requirements for the
grouped actor (Column 3).

Section 50.5 describes some optional groupings that may be of interest
for security considerations and Section 50.6 describes some optional
groupings in other related profiles.

Table 50.3-1: Required Actor Groupings

|                   |                                      |                                                                                                                     |             |
| ----------------- | ------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------- |
| MHDS Actor        | Grouping Condition                   | Actor(s) to be grouped with                                                                                         | Reference   |
| Document Registry | Required                             | CT / Time Client                                                                                                    | ITI TF-1:7  |
|                   | Required                             | ATNA / Secure Node or Secure Application with the STX: TLS 1.2 with the BCP195 Option and the ATX: FHIR Feed Option | ITI TF-1:9  |
|                   | Required                             | MHD / Document Responder                                                                                            | ITI TF-1:33 |
|                   | Required                             | MHD / Document Recipient with the Comprehensive Metadata Option                                                     | ITI TF-1:33 |
|                   | Required                             | PMIR / Patient Identity Consumer                                                                                    | ITI TF-1:49 |
|                   | if the Authorization Option          | IUA / Resource Server                                                                                               | ITI TF-1:34 |
|                   | if the Authorization Option          | IUA / Authorization Server                                                                                          | ITI TF-1:34 |
|                   | if the UnContained References Option | mCSD / Care Services Selective Consumer                                                                             | ITI TF-1:46 |
|                   | if the SVCM Validation Option        | SVCM / Terminology Consumer                                                                                         | ITI TF-1:51 |

## 50.4 MHDS Overview

The MHDS Profile provides a Document Registry that persists, manages,
and provides access using the MHD access methods. This is in support of
IHE Document Sharing as described in Section 50.7.

### 50.4.1 Concepts

The MHDS Profile supports Document Sharing utilizing only FHIR
infrastructures. This is similar functionality to XDS but using the FHIR
standard and not SOAP. The advantage of the FHIR infrastructure is that
it is based on more accessible technology, especially for mobile
devices; but the solution is not limited to mobile devices.

### 50.4.2 Use Cases

#### 50.4.2.1 Use Case \#1: Publication of a new document with persistence

This use case utilizes MHD Document Source using the Provide Document
Bundle \[ITI-65\] transaction to the Document Recipient that is grouped
with the MHDS Document Registry. The Document Registry validates the
publication request and persists the information if approved. The MHD
Comprehensive Metadata Option is required of the MHD Document Source as
the MHD Document Recipient within the MHDS Document Registry will
implement the Comprehensive Metadata Option. See Section 50.1.1.1.1.

#### 50.4.2.2 Use Case \#2: Update of patient identity after an authorized Merge

This use case utilizes the grouped PMIR Patient Identity Consumer to
enable the Document Registry to receive updates of Patient Identity, so
that when a Merge is authorized, the Document Registry will update any
of the references to the former Patient Identity with the Patient
Identity that survives. See Section 50.1.1.1.3.

#### 50.4.2.3 Use Case \#3: Discovery and Retrieval of existing documents

The MHD Document Consumer is supported by the Document Registry grouped
with the MHD Document Responder to allow for the Document Consumer to
discover and retrieve document metadata and content. See Section
50.1.1.1.2.

#### 50.4.2.4 Use Case \#4: Consent Management for disclosure under Use Case \#3

With the use of the Consent Management Option the Document Registry
supports simple Allow and Deny patient privacy consents for disclosure.
These controls are available to prevent unauthorized disclosure. These
Consent Management function does not prevent publication from Use Case
\#1 to enable documentation longitudinal consistency and for accesses
not mediated by Patient Privacy Consent. See Section 50.2.2.

## 50.5 MHDS Security Considerations

*The security considerations for a content module are dependent upon the
security provisions defined by the grouped actor(s).*

This section will discuss how a community that leverages the MHDS
Profiles for document sharing can protect patient privacy and
information security.

An especially important aspect that is beyond the scope of IHE is the
definition of the overall Policies of the community. There are
whitepapers and handbooks from IHE (see Section 50.1), but there is no
single policy that must be put in place by an IHE based community to
ensure privacy and security. In this section, we will discuss potential
policy decisions and positions with regard to the profiles. It is
especially important for the reader to understand that the scope of an
IHE profile is only the technical details necessary to ensure
interoperability. It is up to any organization building a community to
understand and carefully implement the policies of that community and to
perform the appropriate risk analysis. Although this section is not
going to define the policies that a community should have, it will
explore some of the policy building activities to demonstrate how such
policies can be supported.

The Policy Environment is made up of many layers of policies. These
policies work together in an interlocking hierarchy. We will introduce
some of these layers in this section and show how they influence the
technology. At the highest layer are international policies, like the
International Data Protection Principles. Countries or regions will have
specific policies. Some examples are USA HIPAA Security and Privacy
Rules, with further refinement by the states. There are horizontal
policies that are common among a specific industry, such as those from
medical professional societies. Then within the enterprise will be
specific information technology policies. As shown in this section, the
IHE Profiles offer not only the means to exchange information, but to do
so in a way that is supportive of many of the policies mentioned.

The policy landscape that the community is built on needs to be defined
well before the community is built.

### 50.5.1 Policies and Risk Management

IHE solves interoperability problems via the implementation of
technology standards. It does not ***define*** Privacy or Security
Policies, Risk Management, Healthcare Application Functionality,
Operating System Functionality, Physical Controls, or even general
Network Controls.

While community Policies and Risk Management are outside its scope, IHE
does recognize that these elements are a necessary piece of a system
implementation. IHE IT Infrastructure technical white paper, “Template
for XDS Affinity Domain Deployment Planning” outlines some of the issues
that should be evaluated for inclusion in the local Policy creation and
Risk Management decisions. It is therefore the duty of system
implementers to take this guidance into account as part of their Risk
Management practices.

Implementers need to be aware of different kinds of policies that need
to be harmonized with those policies of the local health enterprises
connected to the community. The following is a list of sample policy
fragments to stimulate discussion:

  - Policies for who has access to what type of documents in the
    community

  - Policies for who is allowed to publish documents into the community

  - Policies on the acceptable types of documents that can be published
    into the community

  - Policies that indicate acceptable levels of risk within community

  - Policies that indicate what sanctions will be imposed on individuals
    that violate the community policies

  - Policies on training and awareness

  - Policies on user provisioning and de-provisioning within the
    community and local operation

  - Policies on emergency mode operations

  - Policies on acceptable network use (browser, decency, external-email
    access, etc.)

  - Policies on user authentication methods that are acceptable

  - Policies on backup and recovery planning

  - Policies on acceptable third-party access

  - Policies on secondary use of the information in the community

  - Policies on the availability of the community systems (are the
    community systems considered life critical, normal, or low priority)

  - Policies for maintenance downtime

  - Policies for length of time that information will be maintained in
    the community

These policies are not a flat set, but often interlock and at other
times cascade. An important set of policies are those around emergency
modes. There are wide definitions of cases that are referred to as
emergency mode. These emergency modes need to be recognized for the
risks they present. When these use cases are factored in up-front, the
mitigations are reasonable.

  - Natural or manmade catastrophic disaster (e.g., hurricane,
    earthquake) – often times additional workforce migrates into the
    area from other places to help out. These individuals need to
    quickly be screened and provisioned with appropriate access.

  - Utility failure (e.g., electric failure) – this situation is common
    and easily handled through uninterruptible power supplies and backup
    generation

  - IT infrastructure failure (e.g., hard drive crash) – this situation
    is also common and handled through common infrastructural redundancy

  - Need to elevate privileges due to a patient emergency, often called
    break-glass (e.g., nurse needs to prescribe)

  - Need to override a patient specified privacy block due to eminent
    danger to that patient – this override is not a breaking of the
    policy but would need to be an explicit condition within the policy.

Often times being in the emergency department is considered as an
emergency mode, but the emergency department is really a normal mode for
those scheduled to work there. When looked at as normal mode, the proper
privileges and workflow flexibility can be specified.

Policy development often is frustrated by apparent conflicts in the goal
or effect of multiple layers of policies. These conflicts are often only
on the surface and can be addressed upfront once the details of the
policy are understood. A good example of a policy conflict is in records
retention requirements at the national level vs. at the Medical Records
level. Medical Records regulatory retention is typically fixed at a
short period after death, yet if the patient has black lung then the
records must be preserved well beyond.

### 50.5.2 Technical Security and Privacy controls

In 1980, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(“OECD”) developed Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and
Transborder Flows of Personal Data. These guidelines were intended to
harmonize national privacy laws, uphold human rights, and promote the
free flow of information among its 30 member countries. The OECD
guidelines have served as a basis for data protection laws in the United
States, Europe, Canada, Japan, Australia, and elsewhere. Together, these
principles and laws provide a useful framework for developing general
data protection requirements for health information systems. For more
information see <http://oecdprivacy.org>.

Based on the experience of the IHE participants in implementing
community environments there is a common set of Security and Privacy
controls that have been identified. These controls are informed by a
combination of the OECD data protection principles, experience with
explicit policies at community implementations, and Security Risk
Management.

These security and privacy controls are:

1.  Audit Log Controls – The controls that can prove the system is
    protecting the resources in accordance to the policies. This set of
    controls includes security audit logging, reporting, alerting and
    alarming.

<!-- end list -->

22. Identification and Authentication Controls – The controls that prove
    that a system or person is who they say that they are. For example:
    personal interactions, Oauth, OpenID-Connect

23. Data Access Controls – The controls that limit access by an
    authenticated entity to the information and functions that they are
    authorized to have access to. These controls are often implemented
    using Role Based Access Controls (RBAC), or Attribute Based Access
    Controls (ABAC).

24. Secrecy Controls– As sensitive information is created, stored,
    communicated, and modified; this control protects the information
    from being exposed. For example: encryption or access controls.

25. Data Integrity Controls – The controls that prove that the data has
    not changed in an unauthorized way. For example: digital signatures,
    secure hash algorithms, CRC, and checksum.

26. Non-Repudiation Controls – The controls that ensure that an entity
    cannot later refute that they participated in an act. For example,
    author of a document, order of a test, prescribe of medications.

27. Patient Privacy Controls – The controls that enforce patient
    specific handling instructions.

28. Availability Controls – The controls that ensure that information is
    available when needed. For example: backup, replication, fault
    tolerance, RAID, trusted recovery, uninterruptible power supplies,
    etc. (not an area where Interoperability applies)

### 50.5.3 Applying Security and Privacy to Document Sharing

IHE does not set policies but is policy sensitive. Therefore, we now
discuss the policy enabling technologies but not the policies
themselves.

This section shows how the existing security controls in the local
health IT system are leveraged and extended when they become
interconnected through document sharing.

#### 50.5.3.1 Basic Security

IHE recognizes that in healthcare, with patient lives at stake, audit
control is the primary method of accountability enforcement. The profile
that provides this basic security principle is Audit Trail and Node
Authentication (ATNA). This profile requires three things of each
system:

1.  User authentication and Access Controls are enforced accordingly,

<!-- end list -->

29. Security Audit Logs are recorded, and

30. Strong network authentication and encryption for all communications
    of sensitive patient data

The Security Audit Logging includes a set of security relevant events
that must be audited. When one of these events happens the record of the
event must be described a specific way. The systems are expected to
support the recording of all of the security relevant events that might
happen in the system. The ATNA Profile offloads the recording,
filtering, alerting, and reporting to an audit service. The more
centralized this audit log analysis can be, the easier it is to prove
accountability across the whole Document Sharing exchange.

Once it is known that the system will enforce Access Controls and Audit
Controls then it can be connected to other systems that have also been
assessed positively. In this way these systems only talk to other
systems that also agree to enforce the common policies. This creates a
basis for a chain of trust through accountability among all of the
systems participating in the Document Sharing exchange. The
communications between these trusted systems is also encrypted.

#### 50.5.3.2 Protecting different types of documents

The IHE Document Sharing profiles, like MHDS, allow for many different
types of documents to be shared. These documents are likely to have
different levels of confidential information in them. For instance, one
document might contain the very basic health information that the
patient considers widely distributable. Another document might be made
up totally of information necessary for proper billing such as insurance
carrier and billing address. Yet another document might carry the
results of a very private procedure that the patient wishes to be
available only to direct care providers. This differentiation of the
types of data can be represented using a diagram like found in Table
50.5.3.2-1: Sample Access Control Policies.

Table 50.5.3.2‑: Sample Access Control Policies

| Confidentiality vs Role             | U | L | M | N | R | V |
| ----------------------------------- | - | - | - | - | - | - |
| Administrative Staff                |   | X | X |   |   |   |
| Dietary Staff                       |   |   | X |   |   |   |
| General Care Provider               |   |   | X | X |   |   |
| Direct Care Provider                |   |   | X | X | X | X |
| Emergency Care Provider (e.g., EMT) |   |   |   | X |   |   |
| Researcher                          | X |   |   |   |   |   |
| Patient or Legal Representative     |   | X | X | X | X |   |

Then documents can be labeled with one or more of the codes on the
columns, and results in the specified Functional Roles to be given
access to that type of document. In this way, the document sharing
metadata informs the Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) decisions through
self-describing sensitivity, known as confidentialityCode.

In the same way that the Document Sharing metadata ‘doctype’ defines
what the document is in terms of the clinical/administrative content,
the confidentialityCode defines what the document is in terms of
privacy/security content, sometimes referred to as sensitivity. The
confidentialityCodes should be looked at as a relatively static
assessment of the document content privacy/security characteristics.
Some documents are so sensitive in nature that they simply should not be
shared or published.

The rows are showing a set of functional roles. These roles would be
conveyed from the requesting organization through the use of the
Internet User Authorization (IUA) Profile. This profile defines how a
user and the security/privacy context of the request is defined.
Additional information can be carried such as the PurposeOfUse, what the
user intends to use the data for. Note that Privacy Policies and Access
Control rules can leverage any of the user context, patient identity, or
document metadata discussed above.

#### 50.5.3.3 Patient Privacy Consent to participate in Document Sharing

The topic of Patient Privacy Consent (Authorization) to collect, use,
and disclose is a complex topic. This complexity does not always need to
be exposed in full detail across a Document Sharing exchange. That is, a
request for information does need to consider the current status of any
Patient Privacy Consent that the patient has given, but most of the time
explaining the detail of this Privacy Consent to the requesting
system/individual adds no value. Most often the requesting
system/individual is either fully empowered to receive and use the
content, or not authorized at all. In these cases, the use of user
identity context, as discussed above around the IUA Profile, is
sufficient to make the Access Control decision. The trust relationship
of the Document Sharing exchange includes background governance on
appropriate use, as discussed above around the ATNA Profile.

Privacy Consents may need to be expressed in a way that all parties in a
Document Exchange can understand. IHE has published the Basic Patient
Privacy Consents (BPPC) Profile that can be used to enable basic privacy
consent controls, and Advanced Patient Privacy Consents (APPC) that can
encode more complex rules specific to a patient consent. The encoding of
Consent and advanced rules in FHIR “Consent” resource is possible but
has not yet been profiled by IHE.

Some examples of the type of policy that can be necessary for Patient
Privacy Consents are:

  - Explicit Opt-In (patient elects to have some information shared) is
    required which enables document sharing

  - Explicit Opt-Out (patient elects to not have information shared)
    stops all document sharing

  - Implicit Opt-In allows for document sharing

  - Explicit Opt-Out of sharing outside of use in local care events, but
    does allow emergency override

  - Explicit Opt-Out of sharing outside of use in local care events, but
    without emergency override

  - Explicit authorization captured that allows specific research
    project

  - Change the consent policy (change from opt-in to opt-out)

The BPPC Profile can be used as a gate-keeper to the document sharing
community. BPPC does not define the policies but does allow for a
community that has defined its set of policies to capture that a patient
has chosen one or more of those policies.

For example: Let’s say that the above set of sample policy fragments was
available to a patient sharing in a community. The patient could agree
to Opt-In, and also agree to a specific research project. This set of
acknowledgments would be captured as one or more BPPC documents. These
documents would indicate the policy that is being acknowledged, the date
it is being acknowledged, an expiration date if applicable, etc. Then
the systems involved in the document sharing can know that the patient
has acknowledged these policies and thus the patient’s choices can be
enforced. A system that is doing research can see that this patient has
acknowledged participation in the research project, while other patients
have not.

Let’s further examine what happens when the patient changes their
decision. For example, the patient is moving to a totally different
region that is not served by this community. The patient can acknowledge
the Opt-Out policy. This policy would then be registered as a
replacement for the previous Opt-In policies including the research
policy. Thus, now if that research application tries to access the
patient’s data, it will be blocked as the patient does not have a
current acknowledgement of the research policy.

#### 50.5.3.4 Security and Privacy in a Patient Safety Environment 

The IHE security and privacy model supports both centralized and
distributed control. The entities that are allowed to participate in
community-based document sharing need to be evaluated to assure that
they have the capability to enforce the policies they are expected to
enforce. This may mean that access control is enforced at the edge
systems, at the center, or more likely in both places.

In healthcare, beyond the basic security principles, we must
additionally be sensitive to patient care and safety. The applications
closest to the patient are best informed for determining the context of
the current situation. It is primarily at this level that emergency mode
can be handled in a robust way (often called break-glass).

The IHE security and privacy model is very careful to include security
while allowing for flexible and safe provision of healthcare by
individual participants.

### 50.5.4 IHE Security and Privacy Controls

The following is a breakdown of the security and privacy controls and in
what way the IHE profiles can help. The following table shows the set of
identified Controls (identified in above) as columns and the supportive
IHE Profiles as rows. In this table a ‘√’ indicates a direct
relationship. A direct relationship means that the Profile addresses the
security and/or privacy principle. An ‘.” indicates an indirect
relationship, meaning that the Profile assists with the principle.
Further details on the ‘√’ direct and ‘.’ Indirect relationships can be
found in the profile text or through other webinars.

Table 50.5.4-1: Profiles relationship to Controls

| Function vs Profile                  | Audit Log | Identification and Authentication | Data Access Control (Authorization) | Secrecy | Data Integrity | Non-Repudiation | Patient Privacy |
| ------------------------------------ | --------- | --------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- | ------- | -------------- | --------------- | --------------- |
| Audit Trails and Node Authentication | √         | √                                 | √                                   | √       | √              | √               | √               |
| Consistent Time                      | √         | ∙                                 |                                     |         |                | √               |                 |
| Internet User Authorization          |           | √                                 | √                                   |         |                | ∙               | ∙               |
| Cross-Enterprise User Assertion      |           | √                                 | ∙                                   |         |                | ∙               | ∙               |
| Basic Patient Privacy Consents       |           |                                   | ∙                                   |         |                |                 | √               |
| Mobile Care Services Discovery       |           | √                                 | ∙                                   |         |                | ∙               |                 |
| Document Digital Signature           |           | √                                 |                                     |         | √              | √               |                 |
| Document Encryption                  |           |                                   | √                                   | √       | ∙              |                 |                 |

## 50.6 MHDS Cross Profile Considerations

This section includes interactions between systems, with details at the
actor and transaction level:

1.  Overall Perspective from publication of documents to consumption of
    documents

<!-- end list -->

31. Typical system that publishes documents

32. Typical system that consumes documents

33. Typical system that consumes data elements extracted from documents

34. Central Infrastructure supporting services

### 50.6.1 Interaction Diagram for the MHDS environment.

Figure 50.6.1-1 shows a simplified view, where the following simplified
components are defined:

  - “Publisher” – represents “System that publishes Documents”

  - “Consumer” – represents “System that consumes Documents”

  - “Patient” – represents actions the patient themselves might do, such
    as seeking care

  - “PatientDir” – represents the PMIR Patient Identity Manager that is
    managing identity for the community

  - “ConsentMgr” – represents the Consent Manager function within the
    Document Registry when the Consent Manager Option is used

  - “Registry” – represents the MHDS Document Registry defined in this
    profile

The diagram has “Opt” groupings with actions of a

1)  Patient Identity (PMIR feed): representing new knowledge about the
    Patient at the source. Deeper details on this interaction can be
    found in the PMIR Profile
    
    1.  This diagram does not show the PMIR feed out to all the
        community participants, but this is enabled by PMIR, where all
        the community participants can subscribe to the PMIR manager for
        feed.

2)  Publication of new Documents to represent a case where new data need
    to be published.
    
    1.  the PDQm is used to get the golden patient identifier for use in
        the Document Registry.

3)  the Provide transaction includes a DocumentManifest,
    DocumentReference, and the Binary resource containing the document.
    Get consent to disclose documents
    
    1.  There is no standard protocol, this functionality would be
        provided by the Consent Manager. It might by a User Interface or
        some undefined transaction. The consent must be legally obtained
        according to local regulations and user experience expectations.

4)  Discover Patient Master Identity and data (MHD)
    
    1.  This portion starts with the patient visiting the Consumer. Thus
        there is a potential for a PMIR feed updating the PMIR manager.
        Not all visits will result in a feed.
    
    2.  Given that the Consumer wants to discover documents, it will
        first use PDQm to get the proper identity for the community. As
        indicated above other methods are available other than PDQm.
    
    3.  The Consumer must get a security token from the Consent Manager
        that is part of the Document Registry using the Consent Manager
        Option
    
    4.  The Recipient queries the Registry to find appropriate entries,
        and selects the one of interest
    
    5.  The Recipient will GET the document given the
        DocumentReference.content.attachment.url

![](.//media/image12.png)

Figure 50.6.1-1: FHIR MHDS Controlled Exchange (100% FHIR)

*Source for WebSequence diagram above*

title FHIR MHDS Controlled Exchange (100% FHIR)

participant Publisher

participant Patient

participant PatientDir

participant ConsentMgr

participant Registry

participant Consumer

opt Patient identity (PMIR feed)

Patient-\>Publisher: visits Publisher

Publisher-\>PatientDir: update Patient Identity

PatientDir-\>PatientDir: cross-reference to Patient Master Identity

PatientDir-\>Registry: feed update Patient Master Identity

end

opt publish new document (MHD)

Publisher-\>PatientDir: discover Patient Master Identity (PDQm)

Publisher-\>+Registry: publish New DocumentManifest, DocumentReference,
and Binary (MHD provide)

Registry-\>Registry: persist DocumentReference, Binary, and
DocumentManifest

Registry-\>-Publisher: success

end

opt get consent to disclose documents

note right of Patient

Patient is presented with opportunity to

ConsentMgr likely internal to ConsentMgr

could be FHIR Consent or BPPC

end note

Patient-\>ConsentMgr: Record Consent Permit

end

opt discover Patient Master Identity and data (MHD)

Patient-\>Consumer: visits Consumer

Consumer-\>PatientDir: update Patient Identity (PatientDir feed)

PatientDir-\>PatientDir: cross-reference to Patient Master Identity

PatientDir-\>Registry: feed update Patient Master Identity

Consumer-\>PatientDir: discover Patient Master Identity (PDQ query)

Consumer-\>+ConsentMgr: get authorization token

ConsentMgr-\>ConsentMgr: lookup state of Consent for this patient

ConsentMgr-\>-Consumer: provide token permitting access

Consumer-\>+Registry: using token discovery Entry(s) (MHD query)

Registry-\>Registry: confirm token

Registry-\>-Consumer: here are DocumentReference Entry(s)

Consumer-\>+Registry: using token Ask for data (MHD retrieve)

Registry-\>Registry: confirm token

Registry-\>-Consumer: Here is the document requested

end

### 50.6.2 Typical Client System Designs

This section shows a typical client system design. This is informative
to help explain how these various actors interact.

The actors and transactions are not fully explained here, please see the
formal profiles referenced for details on the actual actor and
transaction functionality, responsibility, and interoperability.

Following the sections outline sample IHE Integration Statements for
systems of various functionality. For more details on the full use and
format of an IHE Integration Statement ([see Appendix
F](https://www.ihe.net/resources/technical_frameworks/#GenIntro)).

#### 50.6.2.1 System that publishes documents System Design

This system can publish documents using the MHD Document Source. The
other actors shown are there to support this primary function.

System that publishes documents - Integration Statement

| Profiles Implemented | Actors Implemented              | Options Implemented                    |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| MHD                  | Document Source                 |                                        |
| CT                   | Time Client                     |                                        |
| PMIR                 | Patient Identity Source         |                                        |
| PIXm                 | Patient Identity Consumer       |                                        |
| PDQm                 | Patient Demographics Consumer   |                                        |
| SVCM                 | Terminology Consumer            |                                        |
| ATNA                 | Secure Node                     | STX: TLS 1.2 Floor using BCP195 Option |
|                      |                                 | ATX: FHIR Feed Option                  |
| IUA                  | Authorization Client            |                                        |
| mCSD                 | Care Service Selective Consumer |                                        |
| NPFS                 | File Consumer                   |                                        |

#### 50.6.2.2 System that consumes documents System Design

This system can consume documents using the MHD Document Consumer. The
other actors shown are there to support this primary function.

System that consumes documents - Integration Statement

| Profiles Implemented | Actors Implemented                        | Options Implemented                    |
| -------------------- | ----------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| MHD                  | Document Consumer                         |                                        |
| CT                   | Time Client                               |                                        |
| PMIR                 | Patient Identity Source                   |                                        |
|                      | Patient Identity Cross-Reference Consumer |                                        |
|                      | Patient Demographics Consumer             |                                        |
| SVCM                 | Terminology Consumer                      |                                        |
| ATNA                 | Secure Node                               | STX: TLS 1.2 Floor using BCP195 Option |
|                      |                                           | ATX: FHIR Feed Option                  |
| IUA                  | Authorization Client                      |                                        |
| mCSD                 | Care Service Selective Consumer           |                                        |
| NPFS                 | File Consumer                             |                                        |

#### 50.6.2.3 System that consumes clinical data elements Systems Design

This system can consume data elements using the QEDm Profile that have
been extracted from the documents published in the MHDS by way of the
mXDE Profile. The other actors shown are there to support this primary
function. Further details can be found in the referenced profiles.

System that consumes clinical data elements - Integration Statement

| Profiles Implemented | Actors Implemented                        | Options Implemented                    |
| -------------------- | ----------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| QEDm                 | Clinical Data Consumer                    |                                        |
| MHD                  | Document Consumer                         |                                        |
| CT                   | Time Client                               |                                        |
| PMIR                 | Patient Identity Source                   |                                        |
|                      | Patient Identity Cross-Reference Consumer |                                        |
|                      | Patient Demographics Consumer             |                                        |
| SVCM                 | Consumer                                  |                                        |
| ATNA                 | Secure Node                               | STX: TLS 1.2 Floor using BCP195 Option |
|                      |                                           | ATX: FHIR Feed Option                  |
| IUA                  | Authorization Client                      |                                        |
| mCSD                 | Care Service Selective Consumer           |                                        |
| NPFS                 | File Consumer                             |                                        |

#### 50.6.2.4 Central Infrastructure as a single system

This is a system that contains all of the Central Infrastructure defined
in MHDS as supporting services. These actors do not need to be combined
into one system. This combined system is provided for informational
purposes.

Central Infrastructure Integration Statement

| Profiles Implemented | Actors Implemented              | Options Implemented                    |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| MHDS                 | Document Registry               | Authorization Option                   |
|                      |                                 | Consent Manager Option                 |
|                      |                                 | UnContained Option                     |
|                      |                                 | SVCM Validation Option                 |
| MHD                  | Document Responder              |                                        |
| MHD                  | Document Recipient              |                                        |
| PMIR                 | Patient Identity Consumer       |                                        |
| CT                   | Time Client                     |                                        |
| SVCM                 | Terminology Consumer            |                                        |
|                      | Terminology Repository          |                                        |
| IUA                  | Resource Server                 |                                        |
|                      | Authorization Server            |                                        |
| ATNA                 | Secure Node                     | STX: TLS 1.0 Floor with AES Option     |
|                      |                                 | STX: TLS 1.0 Floor using BCP195 Option |
|                      |                                 | STX: TLS 1.2 Floor using BCP195 Option |
|                      |                                 | ATX: FHIR Feed Option                  |
| BPPC                 | Content Consumer                |                                        |
| CT                   | Time Server                     |                                        |
| PMIR                 | Patient Identity Manager        |                                        |
| ATNA                 | Audit Record Repository         | STX: TLS 1.0 Floor with AES Option     |
|                      |                                 | STX: TLS 1.0 Floor using BCP195 Option |
|                      |                                 | STX: TLS 1.2 Floor using BCP195 Option |
|                      |                                 | ATX: FHIR Feed Option                  |
| IUA                  | Authorization Server            |                                        |
|                      | Resource Server                 |                                        |
| mCSD                 | Care Service Selective Supplier |                                        |
| NPFS                 | File Server                     |                                        |
| mXDE                 | Data Element Extractor          |                                        |
| QEDm                 | Clinical Data Source            |                                        |

## 50.7 MHDS Background

This section is adapted from the IHE Whitepaper [Health Information
Exchange: Enabling Document Sharing Using IHE
Profiles](https://www.ihe.net/wp-content/uploads/Technical_Framework/upload/IHE_ITI_White-Paper_Enabling-doc-sharing-through-IHE-Profiles_Rev1-0_2012-01-24.pdf).
*The adaption is to the specifics of the MHDS Profile.*

The Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise (IHE) standards profiling
organization has developed a collection of profiles which can be
leveraged for use by healthcare communities for the purposes of document
sharing. One of the most significant applications of healthcare
information technology is the exchange of health information among
disparate clinical information systems and otherwise unaffiliated care
providers. Across the world, various communities have developed or are
developing methods for exchanging health information among healthcare
providers, patients, and other authorized parties.

Effective health information exchange involves a diverse set of
activities and a broad set of challenges, whether that exchange takes
place among affiliated or unaffiliated care providers. The IT
Infrastructure (ITI) domain of IHE has addressed many of these
challenges by defining a series of integration profiles to address
specific aspects of exchanging healthcare information. Each integration
profiles addresses part of the broad set of challenges involved in
health information exchange. The profiles, however, do not attempt to
address governance and policy choices that significantly affect how the
profile is adapted in any particular community. IHE cannot address all
such governance and policy issues but will provide some guidance on
where governance and policy issues are applicable and offer some common
approaches.

It is very important to note that IHE focuses only on interoperability
and does not attempt to solve every issue involved in exchanging health
information. These solutions are meant to be plugged into an
architecture that is designed and executed by the exchange communities
themselves. Thus, while each community will generate an architecture
that meets its individual needs, the use of IHE profiles will lead to
the creation of standards-based communities.

The MHDS Profile focuses on explaining how IHE profiles are used to
address interoperability aspects of document sharing and how they work
together to solve common document sharing problems. The IHE White Paper,
“[Template for XDS Affinity Domain Deployment
Planning](https://www.ihe.net/Technical_Framework/upload/IHE_ITI_White_Paper_XDS_Affinity_Domain_Template_TI_2008-12-02.pdf)”,
provides support for policy and deployment planning. The IHE “[Document
Sharing Metadata
Handbook](https://www.ihe.net/uploadedFiles/Documents/ITI/IHE_ITI_Handbook_Metadata_Rev1-1_Pub_2018-08-20.pdf)”,
provides guidance on developing policy and vocabulary valuesets for use
within the community. For application of Document Sharing for particular
clinical use cases, consider the work of the clinical IHE domains:
Anatomic Pathology, Cardiology, Eye Care, Laboratory, Patient Care
Coordination, Patient Care Device, Pharmacy, Quality, Research and
Public Health; Radiation Oncology, and Radiology.

### **50.7.1 Overview**

A health document sharing community (community) exists for the purpose
of increasing the accessibility of patient health information across
multiple organizations so that clinicians can make more informed
decisions about the care that they provide. Today, there are many
communities already in production and many more are being planned. The
size, nature and scope of communities vary widely but can be
characterized by a number of different aspects.

First, some communities are geographically focused while others are not.
What often comes to mind when speaking of a community is a regional
organization that facilitates information exchange across multiple
organizations that are relatively close in proximity. Major metropolitan
areas tend to be the focus of these communities, but often a regional
community encompasses several rural locales. On the opposite extreme of
the geographic aspect of communities is the network of United States
Veterans Hospitals. The VA (Veterans Administration) hospitals are
spread across the entire map of the US and beyond, yet significant
efforts have been spent on being able to exchange data among these
geographically separated care centers.

A second characteristic by which to categorize communities is the
organizational structure of the community. In some cases, the community
consists of a single hospital and several out-patient clinics that have
a referral relationship with the hospital. In other cases, a network of
competing hospitals, laboratories and private clinics may collaborate to
form a community.

A third means by which to describe communities is the scope of the
content shared. Some communities have very limited exchange
functionality. For instance, a community may focus entirely on
electronic lab result delivery or e-prescribing. Most communities define
a moderate scope to their exchange activities that might include results
delivery, electronic referrals, and perhaps some sharing of
encounter-based information (e.g., dictations). More advanced
communities leverage their network to include even larger scopes
(perhaps including the sharing of documents with the patient’s Personal
Health Record, exchange of clinical summaries, regional patient centric
workflows, etc.). No two communities are alike in terms of the set of
exchange activities that they facilitate.

Finally, a fourth aspect of a community is the size, scope and political
jurisdiction(s) that regulate it. The simplest community uses only an
adhoc arrangement to push documents from one organization to another.
National and sub-national jurisdictions have significant effects on the
organization and operations of a community.

Despite all the variance among communities, each has the same ultimate
goal: to increase the authorized exchange of patient health information
across organizations so that clinicians can make better decisions by
being more informed about the longitudinal health history. This ultimate
goal provides the reason why the community exists, it is their affinity.

Once communities are formed there is a need to exchange health documents
across the communities as well as within them. IHE uses the concept of
cross-community to describe a federation of communities which use mostly
peer-to-peer interactions for the purposes of health document sharing. A
community may be a single organization, like the USA Veterans
Administration, a complex community of many organizations, or a more
simple organization like a single small hospital or facility.
Cross-community describes an environment where multiple communities, be
they simple, small, complex or large, interact without any understanding
of or access to the internal structure of any of the other participants.

The MHDS Profile designs a single community document sharing exchange.

### **50.7.2** Principles of IHE for Health Document Sharing

This section describes several principles which are foundational to
IHE’s approach to health document sharing.

#### 50.7.2.1 General IHE principles

The following general IHE principles are applicable to the set of IHE
profiles used for Document Sharing, including MHDS:

  - IHE profiles describe the interactions between systems and not the
    implementation within systems. Interactions between systems are
    typically described by transactions which are technically specific
    and detailed enough to ensure interoperability among implementing
    systems. The internal implementation of the systems is not
    prescribed by IHE. For example, for patient demographic matching IHE
    specified the format of the query and response but not the algorithm
    or method used for the demographic matching. This allows freedom for
    implementations to address scalability, creative functionality,
    reliability, and other value-add.

  - IHE profiles are designed to support a wide variety of governance
    and policies. Because IHE supports adoption of its profiles around
    the world it is rarely possible to define policies that are
    applicable in all countries. For this reason, IHE profiles are
    designed with a variety of governance and policies in mind and are
    therefore applicable to a wide variety of environments. IHE profiles
    are designed to be policy neutral and support a broad set of
    governance; before they can be deployed there are many governance
    and policy issues that the communities must agree on. Examples of
    governance and policy issues are things like: roles and
    responsibilities, privacy, signature requirements, authorization,
    when to publish, what to publish, administrative roles,
    configuration, service level agreements, clinical pathways,
    long-term availability, etc.

  - IHE assumes there is a general understanding of widely implemented
    Information Technology Standards. IHE profiles typically leverage
    underlying technology like XML, TCP/IP, DNS, Digital Certificates
    (PKI), etc. without detailed explanations.

#### 50.7.2.2 Document Sharing Governance

IHE enables interoperable sharing of documents but assumes this sharing
occurs under a document sharing governance structure agreed to by all
parties involved. The governance structure addresses all policy issues
necessary to enable document sharing; content format and coding; and
other operational characteristics. The IHE profiles are designed to be
agnostic to governance and policy, while also being designed to support
and enforce those governance and policy choices. The governance may
apply only within a small group, such as a hospital and small
physician’s office, or may apply at a large level, like an entire
nation. In fact, sometimes temporary or informal governance (e.g., via
phone call) based on understanding of existing laws or customs is used
for exchange among participants. Typically, in order to allow for
effective and efficient interactions, the governance structure is
formalized through some legal mechanism. Overlapping governance is
common, where one set of agreements exist in the region and a different
set of agreements exist across the nation, yet most organizations will
eventually want to exchange documents regionally, nationally and
internationally.

In addition to general governance agreements, a document sharing
community should address the following issues:

  - **Format of document content**: To enable interoperable transfer of
    documents the receiving side must understand the format and
    structure generated by the sending side. Typically, there is an
    agreement on a set of document formats which must or may be
    supported. This could include unstructured content like PDF or text
    documents. Or a more structured format like CDA or a specific
    implementation guide applied to CDA for a particular purpose. The
    key is to ensure that whatever type of content is shared, the
    receiving system is able to interpret the content in an appropriate
    way, either through human review or machine processing.

  - **Coding within documents**: Structured documents often include
    coded data derived from a given coding system. Agreeing on which
    coding systems to use for which data is often covered by an
    implementation guide for the structured document. Agreeing to an
    implementation guide, or a general guideline for coding systems to
    use, is necessary to enable semantic understanding of the document
    received.

  - **Coding of metadata**: Metadata are data that provide information
    about one or more aspects of the document. In the case of
    IHE-defined document exchange, specific metadata are coded within
    the structure of the content being exchanged. See Section 50.7.2.6
    where the metadata defined by IHE are introduced. Some of that
    metadata have values chosen from a coding system defined by the
    governance of the sharing community. Because IHE profiles can be
    applied in many parts of the world where coding systems are
    different, IHE has not specified which code sets to use and this
    decision must be made among the systems exchanging documents.

The purpose of this aspect of governance is to enable semantic
interoperability among participating partners.

#### 50.7.2.3 Distinction between Documents and Messages

The HL7 standard for [Structured Documents
Section 1.2](http://archive.hl7.org/v3ballotarchive/v3ballot2008may/html/domains/uvcd/UVCD.htm#spec-dam)
describes the document vs. message distinction as follows “A document is
designed to be persistent for long periods of time, whereas messages are
more often expected to be transient. There is a place for both of these
constructs in healthcare.” HL7 characterizes a document by the following
properties:

  - *Persistence –* Documents are persistent over time. The content of
    the document does not change from one moment to another. A document
    represents information stored at a single instance in time.

  - *Wholeness -* A document is a whole unit of information. Parts of
    the document may be created or edited separately, or may also be
    authenticated or legally authenticated, but the entire document is
    still to be treated as a whole unit.

  - *Stewardship –*A document is maintained over its lifetime by a
    custodian, either an organization or a person entrusted with its
    care.

  - *Context* - A clinical document establishes the default context for
    its contents

  - *Potential for authentication* - A clinical document is an
    assemblage of information that is intended to be legally
    authenticated.

Health messages, on the other hand, are not expected to be persistent,
but represent a unit of information at a moment in time where the
context is often implied by the transaction partners. The content is not
always whole, where context may exist in the messaging environment
rather than inside the message itself. The distinction between message
and documents can get blurry at times, as messages sometimes can be
persisted and can contain all necessary context. In fact, messages can
be converted to documents and can carry documents within their content.
But documents are expected to be persistent, relevant over time and
having the same meaning regardless of environment. And messages need not
be any of those things.

The scope of ‘document’ in the MHDS Profile and other IHE Document
Sharing Profiles would prefer that documents have the above “Document”
properties, but does not require that documents have these properties.
The only property required is that there is a mime-type for the
document.

#### 50.7.2.4 Longitudinal Patient Record

Building on the document concepts described above in Section 50.7.2.3 of
persistence, wholeness, stewardship and context, we can identify the
principle of the longitudinal patient record which is foundational and
central to health document sharing. Document Sharing Communities are
patient centric, and the patient identity is associated with every
document shared.

Care providers, which may support a broad variety of healthcare
facilities: private practice, nursing home, ambulatory clinic, acute
care in-patient facility, etc., are typically the sources or creators of
health documents. Typically, a patient will go through a sequence of
encounters in different care settings over the course of his/her
lifetime. With each encounter there is the potential that a provider
will produce a health document that can be shared with the community.
Documents shared by the provider and tracked by a centralized registry
(see Section 50.7.3.2) or federation of communities (see Section
50.7.3.3) form a longitudinal record for the patients that received care
among those providers within the community. Longitudinal records,
therefore, are expected to last over the span of many decades, just as
the documents that comprise them are expected to have persistence,
wholeness, stewardship, context, and potential for authentication. As a
health information exchange is adopted it is a common practice to use an
historical bulk data load, or comprehensive patient summary to
initialize the electronic patient record with data for historical
purposes.

Within a care setting Clinical Data Repositories (CDR) or Clinical
Information Model Infrastructure databases might be used to enhance
Clinical Decision Support as a complement to document discovery. These
databases would not be nationwide, but rather be local to the patient’s
care facility, like EHRs themselves, Document Sharing supports
interoperability amongst local systems and supports a longitudinal
patient record that spans across many local systems potentially using
multiple different database systems.

#### 50.7.2.5 Use of Documents

IHE Document Sharing profiles are content neutral, meaning that any type
of information without regard to content and representation is
supported. A document is any collection of bytes, including proprietary
and textual formats. It is expected that a deployment of Document
Sharing will restrict the format and content of documents exchanged to
those agreed to by the partners in the exchange, as stated in Section
50.7.2.2. While the format and content of a document is not
restrictively defined, it is expected to be a coherent set of healthcare
data that includes enough context to be useful to a practitioner. A
document should have the characteristics as described in Section
50.7.2.3 namely, persistence, wholeness, stewardship, context and
potential for authentication.

IHE Document Sharing profiles assume that a patient identity is
associated with every document shared (see Section 50.7.2.4).

The most common document content standards that are profiled by IHE are
HL7 Clinical Document Architecture (CDA), and an emerging HL7 FHIR
Document. These standard formats support the coding of the clinical
content which allows for use of the content both for display purposes as
well as machine processing. Although IHE encourages the use of CDA or
FHIR as the document content type of choice, it does not restrict the
content of a document in any way. Many times, a document will be encoded
in PDF or simple text (e.g., U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs “Blue
Button” program). Images and manifest documents may also be exchanged
using the same infrastructure. By defining a document so liberally, IHE
enables a common health record sharing infrastructure that is flexible
enough to handle the content types agreed to by the partners in the
exchange.

IHE and other organizations have profiles which define document content
for specific, commonly occurring cases. For example, the IHE Laboratory
domain has defined an XD-LAB content profile to support sharing
laboratory reports. Likewise, the IHE Patient Care Coordination (PCC)
domain has defined various content profiles including a Medical Summary
(XDS-MS) content profile and an Emergency Department Referral (EDR)
content profile. XDS-MS supports a patient’s transfer of care from one
care setting to another, and EDR supports the situation where a
physician determines that a patient should proceed directly to an
emergency department for care. In each of these cases, it is useful for
IHE to profile (define) both the transport and the content of the
documents so that true interoperability can more easily be achieved
throughout the healthcare continuum.

The IHE Content Profiles utilize two abstract actors “Content Creator”
and “Content Consumer”, utilizing an abstraction of “Share Content”;
where “Share Content” can be any of the Document Sharing infrastructures
including MHDS, XDS, XDR, XCA, etc.

![](.//media/image13.png)

Figure 50.7.2.5-1: MHDS Actor Diagram

IHE Content Profiles can be found:

  - CDA <https://wiki.ihe.net/index.php/Category:CDA>

  - FHIR-Document <https://wiki.ihe.net/index.php/Category:FHIR-Doc>

#### 50.7.2.6 Value of Metadata

Another key principle leveraged by IHE Document Sharing is the use of
metadata. As defined in Section 50.7.2.2, metadata are data that
provides information about one or more aspects of the document. While a
document may be any collection of bytes, IHE defines a collection of
metadata about the document that aid its identity, discovery, routing,
security, provenance, privacy, authenticity and electronic
pre-processing. The set of metadata is defined to facilitate
interoperability, so that receiving systems can manage, route and
administer documents even if they are unable to interpret the contents
of the document. IHE metadata are defined in such a way that additional
metadata, defined outside of IHE, can be sent. Of course, systems not
enabled to understand the additional metadata will ignore them, but this
capability allows the set of metadata defined by IHE, which is already
extensive and robust, to be extended when local needs arise.

Metadata serve multiple purposes. They allow systems to perform:

  - automated management of the documents – like assigning priorities or
    work tasks

  - automated patient identification – adding the new information to the
    correct patient’s local record

  - support for provenance management – making decisions based on
    authority of creator of content

  - support for episodic searches – by type, date of service

  - support relationships between documents

  - support privacy/authorization controls – enabling access to content
    only where appropriate

  - support security and integrity controls

Any metadata element may support overlapping purposes, but the
combination of metadata elements provides a robust understanding of the
document and enables automated and manual management of the document
without the requirement access to the detailed clinical information
contained within the document.

#### 50.7.2.7 Document Relationships

The metadata defined in the IHE Document Sharing model encompasses more
than just characteristics of documents. In fact, the metadata model is
very rich, encompassing the relationships between documents through use
of folders, submission sets, and associations. For a complete list of
document metadata, refer to [ITI TF-3:
Section 4.1](http://www.ihe.net/uploadedFiles/Documents/ITI/IHE_ITI_TF_Vol3.pdf#nameddest=4_1_Abstract_Metadata_Model)
– “Abstract Metadata Model”. This abstract metadata model has two
representations: Section 4.2 “ebRIM Representation” used by XDS and XCA;
and Section 4.5 “FHIR Representation” used by MHDS and MHD.

**Documents:** Each document shared using IHE-defined constructs comes
with a collection of metadata which describes the document. The metadata
describing the document includes things like: document identifier,
patient identifier and demographics, document author, class of document,
confidentiality of document, creation time, and events causing creation
of document, document format and several more.

**Folders:** Metadata shared using IHE-defined constructs can also
describe folders and document’s membership in folders. A folder may be
used to collect documents for many purposes, like ease of access or
describing a functional purpose.

**Submission Set:** When documents are published or pushed using IHE
transactions they are collected into submission sets to reflect the
collection of documents sent at a given moment. Since a submission set
reflects a collection of documents it shares some of the same metadata
as a document, like patient identifier and author, and adds metadata
reflecting the collection like identifier of the source, intended
recipient and submission time.

**Document Associations:** The document sharing metadata supports the
description of associations between documents. The associations
supported are: append, replace, transform, transform with replace, and
signs (i.e., digital signature). The append, replace, and transform
associations support representation of document lifecycle events, where
a document is associated with documents which are created as part of
lifecycle events related to the original document.

#### 50.7.2.8 Document Sharing Models

IHE has enabled three distinct Document Sharing Models that share the
principles in this section. Because the principles are the same it is
relatively simple to implement more than one model to accomplish
multiple objectives. The three models are:

  - **Direct Push** – in this model, clinical content in the form of
    documents and metadata is sent directly to a known recipient, or
    published on media for delivery

  - **Centralized Discovery and Retrieve** – in this model, a
    centralized locator is used to discover the location of documents
    which enables a retrieval of the document from a custodian who has
    registered existence of the document with the centralized locator

  - **Federated Discovery and Retrieve** – in this model, a collection
    of peer entities is enabled to query each other to locate documents
    of interest, followed by retrieval of specific documents.

These models share the common definition of a document and metadata
describing documents, folders, submission sets and document
associations. Each requires some level of governance structure in order
to operate, although there is some difference in the governance needs.
For instance, the centralized model requires knowledge only of the
centralized locator which can then provide connections with distributed
document repositories. For Direct Push and Federated approaches, a
detailed directory of participating entitles is typically used to ensure
that the push or query transactions are sent to the proper place. All
include strong support for authenticity and encryption on transport.
Privacy requirements vary especially between the Direct Push, where
privacy policy is generally determined prior to initiation of the
action, and Discovery mechanisms where privacy policy is most often
determined prior to responding to the request. So, while the issues that
need to be resolved through governance are largely the same, the
resolutions will sometimes vary depending on the model chosen.

It is expected that most communities of exchange will start with one of
the three forms of document exchange and, if needed, adopt the others
later. The addition of a new model to an existing deployment is
relatively simple because the IHE profiles are based on common
principles.

#### 50.7.2.9 Patient Identity Management

The Document Sharing mechanisms enabled through IHE assume that a
patient is associated with every document shared. That patient is
described within the metadata describing the document.

In the Discovery models the document query requires the specification of
a patient identifier as known by the query recipient. So, in these
models it is necessary to resolve the patient prior to searching for
documents. In fact, the query does not carry any patient demographic
data beyond the patient identifier.

Resolving the patient is a complex subject made more complex through
historic norms, regulations, and business factors. Some regions have a
universal identifier, but most regions do not. IHE provides several
profiles that aid the resolution of the patient identifier. The profiles
are described in Section 50.7.2.4.

#### 50.7.2.10 Locating sharing partners

One of the challenges of Document Sharing that is not directly addressed
by IHE is the identification of Document Sharing partners. Each Document
Sharing model has a different type of need: where a centralized
discovery approach requires the identification of the central locater,
the peer-based push and discovery mode requires identification of each
of the peers. This ability to discover sharing partners can be
accomplished in many different ways and a clear preference is not yet
apparent. The approaches can be broadly characterized as a) locating
electronic services which can provide information and b) locating
patient specific source of information.

For locating electronic services which can provide information, some
approaches currently used in various parts of the world are:

  - Local configuration files – many organizations keep a local
    configuration file or address book which is managed manually
    whenever a new sharing partner is identified or updated.

  - Service Registry – a services registry is sometimes used as a
    centralized service available to all participants.

  - Healthcare Provider Directory – enables a directory of individual
    and organizational entities along with electronic services provided
    by those entities.

#### 50.7.2.11 Security/Privacy

IHE addresses Privacy and Security through the use of Risk Assessment
and Management. Each profile is assessed for various types of risks and
the profile includes mitigations identified through that assessment in
the privacy and security considerations.

IHE includes profiles specific to interoperability of security and
privacy. Interoperability profiles are not enough to fully address
privacy or security. Privacy and security are enabled and enforced at
many levels of depth including policy, physical environment, procedures,
organizational, departmental, functional, and information technology.

IHE provides profiles that support privacy and security audit logging,
user and system identification and authentication, access control,
encryption, data integrity, digital signatures, and privacy consent
management. Security and Privacy and the profiles IHE offers are
discussed in Section 50.5.

### 50.7.3 Document sharing profiles

The key actors in health information exchange are the document source
actors – those applications or modules that create the document to be
shared, and the document consumer actors – those applications or modules
that retrieve the document to act on it (i.e., present it to the user,
import it into the receiving system, etc.). The strength of the Document
Sharing profiles is that they enable effective sharing of data among
multiple, disparate systems in a way that minimizes the burden that data
sharing imposes on those systems.

The three models defined in Section 50.7.2.8 are designed to support
different use cases. The Direct Push model can be relatively simple, but
it cannot satisfy all use cases because it relies on the source of
documents to know where those documents will be needed. The Discovery
models can also handle use cases like:

  - Treatment of a new condition where prior conditions may be relevant

  - Open Referral, where the patient is allowed to choose the specialist

  - Highly mobile patient

  - Emergency

  - Patient with many medical conditions

  - Patient with complex condition

The IHE profiles addressing these models are:

  - Direct Push – Mobile access to Health Documents (MHD),
    Cross-Enterprise Document Reliable Interchange (XDR), and
    Cross-Enterprise Document Media Interchange (XDM)

  - Centralized Discovery and Retrieve (XDS Affinity Domain) – Mobile
    Health Documents Sharing (MHDS), and Cross-Enterprise Document
    Sharing (XDS)

  - Federated Discovery and Retrieve – Cross-Community Access (XCA)

The Mobile access to Health Documents (MHD) Profile is also an access
(API) method to XDS or XCA environments. These models and other
alternatives are further discussed in the [White Paper on Enabling
Document Sharing through IHE
Profiles](https://wiki.ihe.net/index.php/Enabling_Document_Sharing_Using_IHE_Profiles).

#### 50.7.3.1 Direct Push

This exchange model is not the focus of the MHDS Profile. This function
can be achieved using MHD Profile with Document Source pushing to
Document Recipient.

#### 50.7.3.2 MHDS based Centralized Discovery and Retrieve

The MHDS Profile enables centralized discovery of health documents and
retrieval of those documents from distributed document repositories.

The following scenario describes a typical exchange of clinical
information using MHDS. Dr. Suwati works for New Hope Medical Partners
which provides her with an EMR system. Her patient, Mary Gomez, just
explained to the doctor that she was recently hospitalized at Norwalk
General Hospital. Dr. Suwati would like to review the medical records
that documented Mary's hospital stay. Using her EMR, Dr. Suwati searches
for recent documents for Mary Gomez created by Norwalk General
Hospital's EHR. Having found several documents (lab results, radiology
reports, a discharge summary, etc.), Dr. Suwati chooses first to view
Mary's radiology reports. Having read the reports, she discards them.
However, Dr. Suwati reads the discharge summary and then saves it to
Mary's record in the local EMR.

In this scenario of health information exchange, the primary player (Dr.
Suwati) has three principal objectives: find patient records available
from external systems, view a selection of those records, and
incorporate a select number of those records to her local system. This
sequence of actions is repeated continually in the healthcare setting.
To address this very common scenario, IHE has created the MHDS Profile,
a method to coordinate the authorized discovery and sharing of medical
documents among disparate information systems.

MHDS minimizes the burden imposed on the document sources and consumers
when sharing documents by establishing the use of two infrastructure
components (the document registry and document repositories), which
handle most of the effort involved in exchanging clinical data. This
separation allows for minimal yet rich metadata to be centrally managed
in a document registry while the full clinical details stay protected
within distributed document repositories. The IHE profiles enable the
automation of discovery and retrieve by more advanced health information
systems.

##### 50.7.3.2.1 Document Publishing

The MHD system acts like a Library for books. The document may be made
available within the document registry or at the source organization, an
organized resting place for books (i.e., medical documents) that are
available to library patrons. The document registry is the library's
card-catalog, a tool for locating specific books that lie on those rows
and rows of shelves. Unlike a library, the bookshelves are potentially
deployed within each participating organization; thus, the books are
controlled by the original organization until the moment that another
organization requests a copy.

It is the responsibility of the publisher to put the books (documents)
on the shelf and provide the information for the card-catalog
(metadata). The library will step in to update the card-catalog with the
data needed to find the new book. In IHE jargon the publisher is called
the document source, whereas the act of putting the book on the shelf
and then cataloging it.

The actual location of the document repository will depend on the local
deployment. IHE provides flexibility to enable many different deployment
approaches.

  - The document repository may be combined with the document registry,
    allowing for an integrated environment where no external “update
    registry” transaction is needed.

<!-- end list -->

  - In this case the Document Source includes the document in a FHIR
    Binary Resource within the “Provide Document Bundle” \[ITI-65\]
    transaction

<!-- end list -->

  - The document repository could be combined with a document source
    allowing a large hospital system to enable its local EMR system to
    also act as a document repository. In this case, there is no
    externally recognized “provide and register” transaction, but simply
    the “update registry” transaction from the hospital system to the
    central document registry.

<!-- end list -->

  - In this case the Document Source stores the document in an
    accessible server and includes the URL to that location in the
    “Provide Document Bundle” \[ITI-65\] transaction

<!-- end list -->

  - There is no restriction on how many document repositories can be
    associated with a single document registry. However, any document
    repository must be made available for authorized retrieval of the
    documents contained and referenced within the Document Registry.

  - There are no constraints on where a document repository is hosted,
    the decision is based on many implementation considerations. For
    instance, a hospital may want to keep its clinical content local in
    which case it supplies a repository hosted locally. Or a small
    physician office may have no ability to support a repository and
    will prefer to use a repository provided by an external
    organization, like a hospital system of an infrastructure only
    partner.

##### 50.7.3.2.2 Document Discovery

To complete our analogy, we must consider the library patron (Dr. Suwati
in our case), whose goal is to find specific books. The patron interacts
with the catalog; sometimes searching for specific books, other times
browsing what is available. Once the locations of interesting books are
discovered, the patron fetches them from the shelves. In our MHDS drama,
the document consumer (our library patron) interacts with the Document
Registry through the Document Responder to find medical records of
interest. This process is known as the "Find Document Manifests”
\[ITI-66\], and “Find Document References” \[ITI-67\] transactions. The
act of fetching the medical record from a Document Responder
(repository) is known as the "Retrieve Document" \[ITI-68\] transaction.
Of course, with the structured and coded metadata, this step of
discovery can be highly automated.

##### 50.7.3.2.3 Governance

As described in Section 50.7.2: *Principles of IHE for Health Document
Sharing*, the MHDS Profile is document content neutral; uses document
metadata that are represented in a structured, standard format; and
supports longevity of document storage.

MHDS requires a governance structure as described in Section 50.7.2.2
and defines the MHDS Community as the agent for that governance. An MHDS
Community is a group of healthcare enterprises that have agreed to work
together using a common set of policies and MHDS infrastructures for
sharing patient clinical documents. Some examples are:

  - Regional community of care

  - Nationwide EHR

  - Specialist (cardiology, oncology) or disease-oriented (diabetes)
    care networks

  - Government-sponsored or federation of enterprises

  - Insurance provider supported communities

The MHDS Profile is patient centric and thus requires that a patient
identity is managed centrally as well. The PMIR Profile enables this
patient identity management domain to use a single Patient
Identification Domain so that each patient has a master identity called
a PMIR Golden Domain Patient. This ensures that, for example, when
submitting documents for Mary Gomez the same unique patient identifier
is associated with each document for Mary Gomez, and thus a search can
reliably find all of Mary’s documents by using this single unique
identifier. MHDS specifies that PIXm or PDQm shall be used by document
source and document consumer systems find the unique patient identifier
assigned, see Section 50.7.4 “Patient Identity Management”.

Further detail regarding deployment of an MHDS Community may be found in
the “Template for XDS Affinity Domain Deployment Planning” IHE ITI White
Paper.

##### 50.7.3.2.4 Notifications

The MHDS environment does not yet have a Notification mechanism like
found in XDS in the Document Metadata Subscription (DSUB) Profile.

#### 50.7.3.3 Federated Discovery and Retrieve

MHDS has not yet addressed multiple communities federating. Where
federation is critical the use of XDS and XCA are recommended.

### 50.7.4 Patient Identity Management

The Document Sharing defined in this profile is patient centric, meaning
that a patient is associated with each document shared. When data
related to an individual patient is exchanged among healthcare
information systems it is critical to ensure that the participating
systems are referring to the same patient. This requirement can be
accomplished in several different ways.

One possible way would have each transaction carry enough demographic
data to ensure that the partner is able to match the patient through
demographic matching with locally held characteristics. The challenges
of “enough” demographic data is a difficult problem. It includes issues
around demographics changing over time (name changes) and other aspects
of demographics matching rules. There is also concern around privacy
when unnecessarily transporting patient demographics.

Thus, IHE recommends that the identification of the patient be done
through patient identifiers in a common or accepted patient
identification domain. Thus, prior to the exchange of healthcare
information the partners agreed on a commonly known patient identifier
to refer to the patient. Essentially any identifier that a patient
provides can be used to correlate identities, with a Voluntary Health
Identifier (VHID) being a specific example of an identifier assigned
outside of treatment. This requirement, however, is often non-trivial
and the patient identity management profiles serve the purpose of
enabling this aspect of Document Sharing. Some regions and nations have
enabled the use of a unique patient identifier that is widely available,
but many places still need profiles which aid in patient identifier
discovery.

Systems participating in Document Sharing frequently use locally
assigned patient identifier domains. A patient identifier domain is
defined as a single system or a set of interconnected systems that all
share a common patient identification scheme (an identifier and an
assignment process to a patient) and issuing authority for patient
identifiers.

The Patient Resource Identity Management (PMIR) Profile supports the
management of a master Patient record with links to patient identifiers
from multiple patient identifier domains. The Patient Identity
Cross-Reference for Mobile (PIXm) Profile supports a query given one
identifier known to the client to request cross-referenced identifiers
known to the Patient Identity Manager. The Patient Demographics Query
for Mobile (PDQm) Profile supports the ability to query by a set of
demographics and get in response a complete set of demographics, usually
including patient identifiers in domains of interest.

#### 50.7.4.1 Patient Identity Management

Most health information systems assign to each patient an identifier
(usually a string of letters and/or numbers) that is unique to the
patient within only that information system. Thus, Gary Collins may be
identified as 3562A at the office of his primary Care Physician (PCP)
and 0320 at his specialist's clinic.

IHE utilizes the concept of Patient Identifier Domains which defines a
domain of patient identifiers, like identifiers assigned within a PCP
office, assigned by a single authority and an identifier for each
assigning authority. For example, the PCP office identifier is unique
within the assigning authority for the PCP. If the PCP's system wants to
communicate with the specialist's system about Gary Collins, both
systems must be able to know that 3562A assigned by the PCP offices is
equivalent to 0320 assigned by the specialist’s office, and that neither
of those identifiers is equivalent to Garry Collin with an ID of 333 at
a local Hospital. This is known as a cross-reference that links the two
patient identifiers for Gary Collins.

![](.//media/image14.png)

Figure 50.7.4.1-1: Patient identifier cross-referencing

The PMIR Profile is IHE's answer to the difficulty of managing an
individual patient's multiple Identifiers. A PMIR Patient Identity
Manager system receives feeds from multiple patient identity domains,
such as the PCP and specialist offices. These feeds are coordinating a
master identity for the Patient that could include many alias
identifiers from each domain participating in the PMIR domain.

A consumer system may query the PMIR Patient Identity Manager to receive
the master Patient Identity based on their local identifiers or based on
the identifying characteristics of the patient. In this way the PCP
office can discover the master Patient Identity and know the domain
specific identifier used by the specialist’s system and thus can
communicate with that system using a known patient identifier.

The PMIR Profile Patient Identity Manager integrates the server side of
the PDQm and PIXm Profiles, so that systems needing a patient identity
lookup can use PDQm or PIXm Profiles. A system that publishes documents
or a system that consumes documents can implement the client PDQm
Patient Demographics Consumer or PIXm Patient Identifier Cross-reference
Consumer as their method of discovering patient identities. As such
these clients are agnostic to the Patient Identity Management
technology, which might be a PMIR Patient Identity Manager, a legacy PIX
Patient Identity Manager, etc. A primary use of the PDQm and PIXm
Profiles is to enable document consumers and document sources using the
MHDS Profile to find the patient’s identifier in that Community Patient
Identifier Domain. See Section 50.7.3.2.

#### 50.7.4.2 Patient Demographics Query for Mobile (PDQm)

Demographics (information describing the patient in general) are used to
help identify the patient. With information on dates of birth and sex,
information about Leslie Ramsi, a male born on May-2-1968, can be
distinguished from that of Leslie Ramsi, a female born on July-23-1987.
To help information systems improve their management of patient
demographic information, IHE defines a profile called patient
demographics query (PDQm). The premise of this profile is that some
information systems will have more comprehensive and more accurate
demographic information about a patient than other systems. The
following paragraph describes a typical use of the PDQm Profile.

A typical use of PDQm is to discover the patient's Community Domain
Patient ID. Imagine that Justin McCarthy heads to the local public
health department for a vaccination. The public health department's
clinical system does not assign local patient identifiers and thus
cannot use the PIXm Profile to discover Justin's Community Domain
Patient ID (a required element for the MHD transactions described
above). The public health department can use PDQm to find matches for
Justin and will receive Justin's Community Domain Patient ID as part of
the demographics returned. With the knowledge of Justin's Community
Domain Patient ID, the public health department can now publish his
vaccination record to the community via the MHDS Profile.

### 50.7.5 Common Provider Directory

As with patient identity management, the management of data related to
healthcare providers (both individual providers and provider
organizations) is a fundamental challenge for communities. IHE has
defined the Mobile Care Services Discovery (mCSD) Profile to addresses
this challenge. There are two principal benefits of using the mCSD
Profile. First, mCSD provides a means to disambiguate the identity of
providers (i.e., allow one to distinguish between the 58 year old male
pediatric nurse named Lindsay Smith and the 32 year-old female
orthopedic surgeon Lindsay Smith). Second, mCSD offers a method to
discover a provider's contact information (e.g., phone numbers, street
address, etc., as well as an electronic endpoint and digital certificate
that may be used for trusted communication).

The referral process (one provider referring a patient to the care of
another provider) is one of the most common uses of the mCSD Profile.
When Dr. Palov wishes to send his patient Mary Blythe to a female
endocrinologist who speaks Spanish, he may query the Directory to find
contact information for providers that match those criteria. Similarly,
Dr. Palov may wish to refer another patient, Thomas Reed, to the local
Mercy Hospital. Dr. Palov could query the Directory to discover the
hospital's electronic endpoint (e.g., a secure email address or a
Document Registry endpoint) so that he may forward some of Mr. Reed's
medical records to the hospital in advance of his visit.

The mCSD Profile describes both how to store data regarding healthcare
providers and also how to subsequently access that information. Within
the directory, one may also store relationships between providers. For
example, Nurse Joe may be an individual provider who belongs to the
organizational provider General Hospital.

In environments where mCSD is used to manage a set of identities, these
managed identities can be referenced as the author in document metadata,
whereas when these identities are not managed, they must be included
within the metadata as contained resources.
