This profile only Volume 1, as it orchestrates other profiles into an HIE infrastructure.   This cloud of HIE infrastructure will be made up of many existing actors and one new actor(s) that have some business functionality discussed below. 

# Central HIE Infrastructure 
The central HIE infrastructure might be a virtual cloud of the existing profile specific actors to enable modularity. Modularity where each function could be provided by different vendors, possibly different vendors providing different instances of the same actor. Trying to leverage as much as possible on reference implementations of FHIR Server, and also leverage as much as possible of modularity enabled by defined interoperability interfaces (IHE Profiles). Possibly for those that desire it, ONE common-use FHIR server (e.g. HAPI server, FIRELY server, etc) could serve as the whole central HIE Infrastructure. 

MHDS does include mXDE informatively as it is a bridge that is compatible with MHDS, but there is no specific requirements.

# Plan
* January 7, 2020, 10 am Central -- Decision t-con to approve draft for first public comment
* February 17-21, 2020, face-to-face -- resolve public comment, and approve for second public comment
* May 4-8, 2020, face-to-face -- resolve public comment, and approve for trial implementations

# Open Issues

1.	Given that this profile audience is likely a new audience to IHE Document Sharing exchange, there is more detail included in this supplement in order to be more self-contained and not rely on the reader referencing other whitepapers and handbooks. Is the level of detail within this supplement appropriate? Is there some text that could be removed? Is there some concept that is not well enough defined?
2.	Is there a need to show interaction with XDS exchanges? Current presumption is that this is not minimally needed, but likely would be a future need. Those exchanges that want to be XDS based already have a solution in MHD. The goal of this profile is to provide a FHIR stack without XDS or HL7 v2 backend.  Thus the only interaction one might see in the future is an XCA interface to this MHDS.
3.	Can Document Author be recorded as a link to data in the mCSD managed Directory, or must it continue to be mandated to be ‘contained’? Clearly it can be included as contained but is this still a mandate when the Organization and Practitioner are known to be managed. ***	This profile includes an option that allows the Document Registry to authorize the use of References where MHD forces contained. The necessary change to MHD has not been done yet in order to get feed back from Public Comment.
4.	Can sourcePatientInfo be a version specific link to the centrally managed (PMIR) identity? Clearly it can continue to be contained but is this still a mandate when the Patient is known to be managed.***	There seems to be feedback that the need identified in XDS for sourcePatientInfo has not been important. Many exchanges recommend this element be left empty as one either has good control of patient identity. If one doesn’t have good control, the sourcePatientInfo element is only going to add to the confusion.
5.	As diagrammed here there is no formal Document Repository, although the functionality is provided virtually. That is that a Document Source can choose to not include the document as a Binary resource, but rather include a URL to a repository that is recognized as part of the trust domain. This distinction is available in MHD today, although it is not pointed out as such and thus not well known.  The only value to creating a Document Repository is to define input transaction as different from output transaction. Specifically by defining a Document Repository we enable third-party Repository systems. A Document Repository could be supported as is today, but is not defined by IHE MHDS profile. 
