This Public Comment ballot contains a subset of IHE profiles that leverage FHIR. The subset is made up of a high priority set of IHE Profiles that cover the functionality defined in USA HHS/ONC Meaningful Use regulations around the need for an API. The trigger for this Public Comment ballot is to update these profiles from FHIR STU3, to FHIR R4. The changes made to the supplements is targetting this FHIR Release 4 update. There are other improvements that were identified as part of the revision and from Change Proposal submissions. Where these other improvements are non-controversal they are included in this Public Comment. Where these improvement opportunites require discussion or may present concerns with passage of the Public Comment ballot, they will be addressed as part of standalone Change Proposals. This approach is intended to better aid with a successful Public Comment ballot so as to have higher likelyhood of being able to meet a March 1st publication timeframe.

Question:
* Where the refered to portion of FHIR is normative (e.g. Bundle Resource), should the url be the non-version specific URL? That is http://hl7.org/fhir/bundle.html vs http://hl7.org/fhir/R4/bundle.html. Where the portion of FHIR is not normative, clearly the version specific URL should be used. This would result in Profiles that have mixed URL roots.
* Should the major version number of these supplements be increased? The change from FHIR STU3 to Release 4 is a major version change at the FHIR level. The IHE profiles do not provide backward compatibility. So it would seem a major version change is proper. The drawback of this is that the IHE profile major version # will not be numerically the same as the FHIR version; this fenomina has caused confusion within HL7 FHIR/IG community.  Increasing only the minor version number on the IHE profile supplement is a more proper indication of the fact no functional change has happened.
